                                 PART I
              (Being a reprint from the reminiscences of                         John H. Watson, M.D.,                 late of the Army Medical Department.)




     CHAPTER I     Mr. Sherlock Holmes

In the year 1878 I took my degree of Doctor of Medicine of theUniversity of London, and proceeded to Netley to go through thecourse prescribed for surgeons in the army. Having completed mystudies there, I was duly attached to the Fifth NorthumberlandFusiliers as Assistant Surgeon. The regiment was stationed in Indiaat the time, and before I could join it, the second Afghan war hadbroken out. On landing at Bombay, I learned that my corps hadadvanced through the passes, and was already deep in the enemy'scountry. I followed, however, with many other officers who were inthe same situation as myself, and succeeded in reaching Candahar insafety, where I found my regiment, and at once entered upon my newduties.
The campaign brought honours and promotion to many, but for me it hadnothing but misfortune and disaster. I was removed from my brigadeand attached to the Berkshires, with whom I served at the fatalbattle of Maiwand. There I was struck on the shoulder by a Jezailbullet, which shattered the bone and grazed the subclavian artery. Ishould have fallen into the hands of the murderous Ghazis had it notbeen for the devotion and courage shown by Murray, my orderly, whothrew me across a pack-horse, and succeeded in bringing me safely tothe British lines.
Worn with pain, and weak from the prolonged hardships which I hadundergone, I was removed, with a great train of wounded sufferers, tothe base hospital at Peshawar. Here I rallied, and had alreadyimproved so far as to be able to walk about the wards, and even tobask a little upon the verandah, when I was struck down by entericfever, that curse of our Indian possessions. For months my life wasdespaired of, and when at last I came to myself and becameconvalescent, I was so weak and emaciated that a medical boarddetermined that not a day should be lost in sending me back toEngland. I was dispatched, accordingly, in the troopship Orontes, andlanded a month later on Portsmouth jetty, with my healthirretrievably ruined, but with permission from a paternal governmentto spend the next nine months in attempting to improve it.
I had neither kith nor kin in England, and was therefore as free asair--or as free as an income of eleven shillings and sixpence a daywill permit a man to be. Under such circumstances, I naturallygravitated to London, that great cesspool into which all the loungersand idlers of the Empire are irresistibly drained. There I stayed forsome time at a private hotel in the Strand, leading a comfortless,meaningless existence, and spending such money as I had, considerablymore freely than I ought. So alarming did the state of my financesbecome, that I soon realized that I must either leave the metropolisand rusticate somewhere in the country, or that I must make acomplete alteration in my style of living. Choosing the latteralternative, I began by making up my mind to leave the hotel, and totake up my quarters in some less pretentious and less expensivedomicile.
On the very day that I had come to this conclusion, I was standing atthe Criterion Bar, when some one tapped me on the shoulder, andturning round I recognized young Stamford, who had been a dresserunder me at Bart's. The sight of a friendly face in the greatwilderness of London is a pleasant thing indeed to a lonely man. Inold days Stamford had never been a particular crony of mine, but nowI hailed him with enthusiasm, and he, in his turn, appeared to bedelighted to see me. In the exuberance of my joy, I asked him tolunch with me at the Holborn, and we started off together in ahansom.
"Whatever have you been doing with yourself, Watson?" he asked inundisguised wonder, as we rattled through the crowded London streets."You are as thin as a lath and as brown as a nut."
I gave him a short sketch of my adventures, and had hardly concludedit by the time that we reached our destination.
"Poor devil!" he said, commiseratingly, after he had listened to mymisfortunes. "What are you up to now?"
"Looking for lodgings," I answered. "Trying to solve the problem asto whether it is possible to get comfortable rooms at a reasonableprice."
"That's a strange thing," remarked my companion; "you are the secondman to-day that has used that expression to me."
"And who was the first?" I asked.
"A fellow who is working at the chemical laboratory up at thehospital. He was bemoaning himself this morning because he could notget someone to go halves with him in some nice rooms which he hadfound, and which were too much for his purse."
"By Jove!" I cried, "if he really wants someone to share the roomsand the expense, I am the very man for him. I should prefer having apartner to being alone."
Young Stamford looked rather strangely at me over his wine-glass."You don't know Sherlock Holmes yet," he said; "perhaps you would notcare for him as a constant companion."
"Why, what is there against him?"
"Oh, I didn't say there was anything against him. He is a littlequeer in his ideas--an enthusiast in some branches of science. As faras I know he is a decent fellow enough."
"A medical student, I suppose?" said I.
"No--I have no idea what he intends to go in for. I believe he iswell up in anatomy, and he is a first-class chemist; but, as far as Iknow, he has never taken out any systematic medical classes. Hisstudies are very desultory and eccentric, but he has amassed a lot ofout-of-the way knowledge which would astonish his professors."
"Did you never ask him what he was going in for?" I asked.
"No; he is not a man that it is easy to draw out, though he can becommunicative enough when the fancy seizes him."
"I should like to meet him," I said. "If I am to lodge with anyone, Ishould prefer a man of studious and quiet habits. I am not strongenough yet to stand much noise or excitement. I had enough of both inAfghanistan to last me for the remainder of my natural existence. Howcould I meet this friend of yours?"
"He is sure to be at the laboratory," returned my companion. "Heeither avoids the place for weeks, or else he works there frommorning to night. If you like, we shall drive round together afterluncheon."
"Certainly," I answered, and the conversation drifted away into otherchannels.
As we made our way to the hospital after leaving the Holborn,Stamford gave me a few more particulars about the gentleman whom Iproposed to take as a fellow-lodger.
"You mustn't blame me if you don't get on with him," he said; "I knownothing more of him than I have learned from meeting him occasionallyin the laboratory. You proposed this arrangement, so you must nothold me responsible."
"If we don't get on it will be easy to part company," I answered. "Itseems to me, Stamford," I added, looking hard at my companion, "thatyou have some reason for washing your hands of the matter. Is thisfellow's temper so formidable, or what is it? Don't be mealy-mouthedabout it."
"It is not easy to express the inexpressible," he answered with alaugh. "Holmes is a little too scientific for my tastes--itapproaches to cold-bloodedness. I could imagine his giving a friend alittle pinch of the latest vegetable alkaloid, not out ofmalevolence, you understand, but simply out of a spirit of inquiry inorder to have an accurate idea of the effects. To do him justice, Ithink that he would take it himself with the same readiness. Heappears to have a passion for definite and exact knowledge."
"Very right too."
"Yes, but it may be pushed to excess. When it comes to beating thesubjects in the dissecting-rooms with a stick, it is certainly takingrather a bizarre shape."
"Beating the subjects!"
"Yes, to verify how far bruises may be produced after death. I sawhim at it with my own eyes."
"And yet you say he is not a medical student?"
"No. Heaven knows what the objects of his studies are. But here weare, and you must form your own impressions about him." As he spoke,we turned down a narrow lane and passed through a small side-door,which opened into a wing of the great hospital. It was familiarground to me, and I needed no guiding as we ascended the bleak stonestaircase and made our way down the long corridor with its vista ofwhitewashed wall and dun-coloured doors. Near the further end a lowarched passage branched away from it and led to the chemicallaboratory.
This was a lofty chamber, lined and littered with countless bottles.Broad, low tables were scattered about, which bristled with retorts,test-tubes, and little Bunsen lamps, with their blue flickeringflames. There was only one student in the room, who was bending overa distant table absorbed in his work. At the sound of our steps heglanced round and sprang to his feet with a cry of pleasure. "I'vefound it! I've found it," he shouted to my companion, running towardsus with a test-tube in his hand. "I have found a re-agent which isprecipitated by hoemoglobin, and by nothing else." Had he discovereda gold mine, greater delight could not have shone upon his features.
"Dr. Watson, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said Stamford, introducing us.
"How are you?" he said cordially, gripping my hand with a strengthfor which I should hardly have given him credit. "You have been inAfghanistan, I perceive."
"How on earth did you know that?" I asked in astonishment.
"Never mind," said he, chuckling to himself. "The question now isabout hoemoglobin. No doubt you see the significance of thisdiscovery of mine?"
"It is interesting, chemically, no doubt," I answered, "butpractically--"
"Why, man, it is the most practical medico-legal discovery for years.Don't you see that it gives us an infallible test for blood stains.Come over here now!" He seized me by the coat-sleeve in hiseagerness, and drew me over to the table at which he had beenworking. "Let us have some fresh blood," he said, digging a longbodkin into his finger, and drawing off the resulting drop of bloodin a chemical pipette. "Now, I add this small quantity of blood to alitre of water. You perceive that the resulting mixture has theappearance of pure water. The proportion of blood cannot be more thanone in a million. I have no doubt, however, that we shall be able toobtain the characteristic reaction." As he spoke, he threw into thevessel a few white crystals, and then added some drops of atransparent fluid. In an instant the contents assumed a dull mahoganycolour, and a brownish dust was precipitated to the bottom of theglass jar.
"Ha! ha!" he cried, clapping his hands, and looking as delighted as achild with a new toy. "What do you think of that?"
"It seems to be a very delicate test," I remarked.
"Beautiful! beautiful! The old Guiacum test was very clumsy anduncertain. So is the microscopic examination for blood corpuscles.The latter is valueless if the stains are a few hours old. Now, thisappears to act as well whether the blood is old or new. Had this testbeen invented, there are hundreds of men now walking the earth whowould long ago have paid the penalty of their crimes."
"Indeed!" I murmured.
"Criminal cases are continually hinging upon that one point. A man issuspected of a crime months perhaps after it has been committed. Hislinen or clothes are examined, and brownish stains discovered uponthem. Are they blood stains, or mud stains, or rust stains, or fruitstains, or what are they? That is a question which has puzzled manyan expert, and why? Because there was no reliable test. Now we havethe Sherlock Holmes' test, and there will no longer be anydifficulty."
His eyes fairly glittered as he spoke, and he put his hand over hisheart and bowed as if to some applauding crowd conjured up by hisimagination.
"You are to be congratulated," I remarked, considerably surprised athis enthusiasm.
"There was the case of Von Bischoff at Frankfort last year. He wouldcertainly have been hung had this test been in existence. Then therewas Mason of Bradford, and the notorious Muller, and Lefevre ofMontpellier, and Samson of new Orleans. I could name a score of casesin which it would have been decisive."
"You seem to be a walking calendar of crime," said Stamford with alaugh. "You might start a paper on those lines. Call it the 'PoliceNews of the Past.'"
"Very interesting reading it might be made, too," remarked SherlockHolmes, sticking a small piece of plaster over the prick on hisfinger. "I have to be careful," he continued, turning to me with asmile, "for I dabble with poisons a good deal." He held out his handas he spoke, and I noticed that it was all mottled over with similarpieces of plaster, and discoloured with strong acids.
"We came here on business," said Stamford, sitting down on a highthree-legged stool, and pushing another one in my direction with hisfoot. "My friend here wants to take diggings, and as you werecomplaining that you could get no one to go halves with you, Ithought that I had better bring you together."
Sherlock Holmes seemed delighted at the idea of sharing his roomswith me. "I have my eye on a suite in Baker Street," he said, "whichwould suit us down to the ground. You don't mind the smell of strongtobacco, I hope?"
"I always smoke 'ship's' myself," I answered.
"That's good enough. I generally have chemicals about, andoccasionally do experiments. Would that annoy you?"
"By no means."
"Let me see--what are my other shortcomings. I get in the dumps attimes, and don't open my mouth for days on end. You must not think Iam sulky when I do that. Just let me alone, and I'll soon be right.What have you to confess now? It's just as well for two fellows toknow the worst of one another before they begin to live together."
I laughed at this cross-examination. "I keep a bull pup," I said,"and I object to rows because my nerves are shaken, and I get up atall sorts of ungodly hours, and I am extremely lazy. I have anotherset of vices when I'm well, but those are the principal ones atpresent."
"Do you include violin-playing in your category of rows?" he asked,anxiously.
"It depends on the player," I answered. "A well-played violin is atreat for the gods--a badly-played one--"
"Oh, that's all right," he cried, with a merry laugh. "I think we mayconsider the thing as settled--that is, if the rooms are agreeable toyou."
"When shall we see them?"
"Call for me here at noon to-morrow, and we'll go together and settleeverything," he answered.
"All right--noon exactly," said I, shaking his hand.
We left him working among his chemicals, and we walked togethertowards my hotel.
"By the way," I asked suddenly, stopping and turning upon Stamford,"how the deuce did he know that I had come from Afghanistan?"
My companion smiled an enigmatical smile. "That's just his littlepeculiarity," he said. "A good many people have wanted to know how hefinds things out."
"Oh! a mystery is it?" I cried, rubbing my hands. "This is verypiquant. I am much obliged to you for bringing us together. 'Theproper study of mankind is man,' you know."
"You must study him, then," Stamford said, as he bade me good-bye."You'll find him a knotty problem, though. I'll wager he learns moreabout you than you about him. Good-bye."
"Good-bye," I answered, and strolled on to my hotel, considerablyinterested in my new acquaintance.




     CHAPTER II     The Science Of Deduction

We met next day as he had arranged, and inspected the rooms at No.221b, Baker Street, of which he had spoken at our meeting. Theyconsisted of a couple of comfortable bed-rooms and a single largeairy sitting-room, cheerfully furnished, and illuminated by two broadwindows. So desirable in every way were the apartments, and somoderate did the terms seem when divided between us, that the bargainwas concluded upon the spot, and we at once entered into possession.That very evening I moved my things round from the hotel, and on thefollowing morning Sherlock Holmes followed me with several boxes andportmanteaus. For a day or two we were busily employed in unpackingand laying out our property to the best advantage. That done, wegradually began to settle down and to accommodate ourselves to ournew surroundings.
Holmes was certainly not a difficult man to live with. He was quietin his ways, and his habits were regular. It was rare for him to beup after ten at night, and he had invariably breakfasted and gone outbefore I rose in the morning. Sometimes he spent his day at thechemical laboratory, sometimes in the dissecting-rooms, andoccasionally in long walks, which appeared to take him into thelowest portions of the City. Nothing could exceed his energy when theworking fit was upon him; but now and again a reaction would seizehim, and for days on end he would lie upon the sofa in thesitting-room, hardly uttering a word or moving a muscle from morningto night. On these occasions I have noticed such a dreamy, vacantexpression in his eyes, that I might have suspected him of beingaddicted to the use of some narcotic, had not the temperance andcleanliness of his whole life forbidden such a notion.
As the weeks went by, my interest in him and my curiosity as to hisaims in life, gradually deepened and increased. His very person andappearance were such as to strike the attention of the most casualobserver. In height he was rather over six feet, and so excessivelylean that he seemed to be considerably taller. His eyes were sharpand piercing, save during those intervals of torpor to which I havealluded; and his thin, hawk-like nose gave his whole expression anair of alertness and decision. His chin, too, had the prominence andsquareness which mark the man of determination. His hands wereinvariably blotted with ink and stained with chemicals, yet he waspossessed of extraordinary delicacy of touch, as I frequently hadoccasion to observe when I watched him manipulating his fragilephilosophical instruments.
The reader may set me down as a hopeless busybody, when I confess howmuch this man stimulated my curiosity, and how often I endeavoured tobreak through the reticence which he showed on all that concernedhimself. Before pronouncing judgment, however, be it remembered, howobjectless was my life, and how little there was to engage myattention. My health forbade me from venturing out unless the weatherwas exceptionally genial, and I had no friends who would call upon meand break the monotony of my daily existence. Under thesecircumstances, I eagerly hailed the little mystery which hung aroundmy companion, and spent much of my time in endeavouring to unravelit.
He was not studying medicine. He had himself, in reply to a question,confirmed Stamford's opinion upon that point. Neither did he appearto have pursued any course of reading which might fit him for adegree in science or any other recognized portal which would give himan entrance into the learned world. Yet his zeal for certain studieswas remarkable, and within eccentric limits his knowledge was soextraordinarily ample and minute that his observations have fairlyastounded me. Surely no man would work so hard or attain such preciseinformation unless he had some definite end in view. Desultoryreaders are seldom remarkable for the exactness of their learning. Noman burdens his mind with small matters unless he has some very goodreason for doing so.
His ignorance was as remarkable as his knowledge. Of contemporaryliterature, philosophy and politics he appeared to know next tonothing. Upon my quoting Thomas Carlyle, he inquired in the naivestway who he might be and what he had done. My surprise reached aclimax, however, when I found incidentally that he was ignorant ofthe Copernican Theory and of the composition of the Solar System.That any civilized human being in this nineteenth century should notbe aware that the earth travelled round the sun appeared to be to mesuch an extraordinary fact that I could hardly realize it.
"You appear to be astonished," he said, smiling at my expression ofsurprise. "Now that I do know it I shall do my best to forget it."
"To forget it!"
"You see," he explained, "I consider that a man's brain originally islike a little empty attic, and you have to stock it with suchfurniture as you choose. A fool takes in all the lumber of every sortthat he comes across, so that the knowledge which might be useful tohim gets crowded out, or at best is jumbled up with a lot of otherthings so that he has a difficulty in laying his hands upon it. Nowthe skilful workman is very careful indeed as to what he takes intohis brain-attic. He will have nothing but the tools which may helphim in doing his work, but of these he has a large assortment, andall in the most perfect order. It is a mistake to think that thatlittle room has elastic walls and can distend to any extent. Dependupon it there comes a time when for every addition of knowledge youforget something that you knew before. It is of the highestimportance, therefore, not to have useless facts elbowing out theuseful ones."
"But the Solar System!" I protested.
"What the deuce is it to me?" he interrupted impatiently; "you saythat we go round the sun. If we went round the moon it would not makea pennyworth of difference to me or to my work."
I was on the point of asking him what that work might be, butsomething in his manner showed me that the question would be anunwelcome one. I pondered over our short conversation, however, andendeavoured to draw my deductions from it. He said that he wouldacquire no knowledge which did not bear upon his object. Thereforeall the knowledge which he possessed was such as would be useful tohim. I enumerated in my own mind all the various points upon which hehad shown me that he was exceptionally well-informed. I even took apencil and jotted them down. I could not help smiling at the documentwhen I had completed it. It ran in this way--
Sherlock Holmes--his limits.1. Knowledge of Literature.--Nil.2. Philosophy.--Nil.3. Astronomy.--Nil.4. Politics.--Feeble.5. Botany.--Variable. Well up in belladonna, opium, and poisonsgenerally. Knows nothing of practical gardening.6. Geology.--Practical, but limited. Tells at a glance differentsoils from each other. After walks has shown me splashes upon histrousers, and told me by their colour and consistence in what part ofLondon he had received them.7. Chemistry.--Profound.8. Anatomy.--Accurate, but unsystematic.9. Sensational Literature.--Immense. He appears to know every detailof every horror perpetrated in the century.10. Plays the violin well.11. Is an expert singlestick player, boxer, and swordsman.12. Has a good practical knowledge of British law.
When I had got so far in my list I threw it into the fire in despair."If I can only find what the fellow is driving at by reconciling allthese accomplishments, and discovering a calling which needs themall," I said to myself, "I may as well give up the attempt at once."
I see that I have alluded above to his powers upon the violin. Thesewere very remarkable, but as eccentric as all his otheraccomplishments. That he could play pieces, and difficult pieces, Iknew well, because at my request he has played me some ofMendelssohn's Lieder, and other favourites. When left to himself,however, he would seldom produce any music or attempt any recognizedair. Leaning back in his arm-chair of an evening, he would close hiseyes and scrape carelessly at the fiddle which was thrown across hisknee. Sometimes the chords were sonorous and melancholy. Occasionallythey were fantastic and cheerful. Clearly they reflected the thoughtswhich possessed him, but whether the music aided those thoughts, orwhether the playing was simply the result of a whim or fancy was morethan I could determine. I might have rebelled against theseexasperating solos had it not been that he usually terminated them byplaying in quick succession a whole series of my favourite airs as aslight compensation for the trial upon my patience.
During the first week or so we had no callers, and I had begun tothink that my companion was as friendless a man as I was myself.Presently, however, I found that he had many acquaintances, and thosein the most different classes of society. There was one little sallowrat-faced, dark-eyed fellow who was introduced to me as Mr. Lestrade,and who came three or four times in a single week. One morning ayoung girl called, fashionably dressed, and stayed for half an houror more. The same afternoon brought a grey-headed, seedy visitor,looking like a Jew pedlar, who appeared to me to be much excited, andwho was closely followed by a slipshod elderly woman. On anotheroccasion an old white-haired gentleman had an interview with mycompanion; and on another a railway porter in his velveteen uniform.When any of these nondescript individuals put in an appearance,Sherlock Holmes used to beg for the use of the sitting-room, and Iwould retire to my bed-room. He always apologized to me for puttingme to this inconvenience. "I have to use this room as a place ofbusiness," he said, "and these people are my clients." Again I had anopportunity of asking him a point blank question, and again mydelicacy prevented me from forcing another man to confide in me. Iimagined at the time that he had some strong reason for not alludingto it, but he soon dispelled the idea by coming round to the subjectof his own accord.
It was upon the 4th of March, as I have good reason to remember, thatI rose somewhat earlier than usual, and found that Sherlock Holmeshad not yet finished his breakfast. The landlady had become soaccustomed to my late habits that my place had not been laid nor mycoffee prepared. With the unreasonable petulance of mankind I rangthe bell and gave a curt intimation that I was ready. Then I pickedup a magazine from the table and attempted to while away the timewith it, while my companion munched silently at his toast. One of thearticles had a pencil mark at the heading, and I naturally began torun my eye through it.
Its somewhat ambitious title was "The Book of Life," and it attemptedto show how much an observant man might learn by an accurate andsystematic examination of all that came in his way. It struck me asbeing a remarkable mixture of shrewdness and of absurdity. Thereasoning was close and intense, but the deductions appeared to me tobe far-fetched and exaggerated. The writer claimed by a momentaryexpression, a twitch of a muscle or a glance of an eye, to fathom aman's inmost thoughts. Deceit, according to him, was an impossibilityin the case of one trained to observation and analysis. Hisconclusions were as infallible as so many propositions of Euclid. Sostartling would his results appear to the uninitiated that until theylearned the processes by which he had arrived at them they might wellconsider him as a necromancer.
"From a drop of water," said the writer, "a logician could infer thepossibility of an Atlantic or a Niagara without having seen or heardof one or the other. So all life is a great chain, the nature ofwhich is known whenever we are shown a single link of it. Like allother arts, the Science of Deduction and Analysis is one which canonly be acquired by long and patient study nor is life long enough toallow any mortal to attain the highest possible perfection in it.Before turning to those moral and mental aspects of the matter whichpresent the greatest difficulties, let the enquirer begin bymastering more elementary problems. Let him, on meeting afellow-mortal, learn at a glance to distinguish the history of theman, and the trade or profession to which he belongs. Puerile as suchan exercise may seem, it sharpens the faculties of observation, andteaches one where to look and what to look for. By a man's fingernails, by his coat-sleeve, by his boot, by his trouser knees, by thecallosities of his forefinger and thumb, by his expression, by hisshirt cuffs--by each of these things a man's calling is plainlyrevealed. That all united should fail to enlighten the competentenquirer in any case is almost inconceivable."
"What ineffable twaddle!" I cried, slapping the magazine down on thetable, "I never read such rubbish in my life."
"What is it?" asked Sherlock Holmes.
"Why, this article," I said, pointing at it with my egg spoon as Isat down to my breakfast. "I see that you have read it since you havemarked it. I don't deny that it is smartly written. It irritates methough. It is evidently the theory of some arm-chair lounger whoevolves all these neat little paradoxes in the seclusion of his ownstudy. It is not practical. I should like to see him clapped down ina third class carriage on the Underground, and asked to give thetrades of all his fellow-travellers. I would lay a thousand to oneagainst him."
"You would lose your money," Sherlock Holmes remarked calmly.  "Asfor the article I wrote it myself."
"You!"
"Yes, I have a turn both for observation and for deduction. Thetheories which I have expressed there, and which appear to you to beso chimerical are really extremely practical--so practical that Idepend upon them for my bread and cheese."
"And how?" I asked involuntarily.
"Well, I have a trade of my own. I suppose I am the only one in theworld. I'm a consulting detective, if you can understand what thatis. Here in London we have lots of Government detectives and lots ofprivate ones. When these fellows are at fault they come to me, and Imanage to put them on the right scent. They lay all the evidencebefore me, and I am generally able, by the help of my knowledge ofthe history of crime, to set them straight. There is a strong familyresemblance about misdeeds, and if you have all the details of athousand at your finger ends, it is odd if you can't unravel thethousand and first. Lestrade is a well-known detective. He gothimself into a fog recently over a forgery case, and that was whatbrought him here."
"And these other people?"
"They are mostly sent on by private inquiry agencies. They are allpeople who are in trouble about something, and want a littleenlightening. I listen to their story, they listen to my comments,and then I pocket my fee."
"But do you mean to say," I said, "that without leaving your room youcan unravel some knot which other men can make nothing of, althoughthey have seen every detail for themselves?"
"Quite so. I have a kind of intuition that way. Now and again a caseturns up which is a little more complex. Then I have to bustle aboutand see things with my own eyes. You see I have a lot of specialknowledge which I apply to the problem, and which facilitates matterswonderfully. Those rules of deduction laid down in that article whicharoused your scorn, are invaluable to me in practical work.Observation with me is second nature. You appeared to be surprisedwhen I told you, on our first meeting, that you had come fromAfghanistan."
"You were told, no doubt."
"Nothing of the sort. I knew you came from Afghanistan. From longhabit the train of thoughts ran so swiftly through my mind, that Iarrived at the conclusion without being conscious of intermediatesteps. There were such steps, however. The train of reasoning ran,'Here is a gentleman of a medical type, but with the air of amilitary man. Clearly an army doctor, then. He has just come from thetropics, for his face is dark, and that is not the natural tint ofhis skin, for his wrists are fair. He has undergone hardship andsickness, as his haggard face says clearly. His left arm has beeninjured. He holds it in a stiff and unnatural manner. Where in thetropics could an English army doctor have seen much hardship and gothis arm wounded? Clearly in Afghanistan.' The whole train of thoughtdid not occupy a second. I then remarked that you came fromAfghanistan, and you were astonished."
"It is simple enough as you explain it," I said, smiling. "You remindme of Edgar Allen Poe's Dupin. I had no idea that such individualsdid exist outside of stories."
Sherlock Holmes rose and lit his pipe. "No doubt you think that youare complimenting me in comparing me to Dupin," he observed. "Now, inmy opinion, Dupin was a very inferior fellow. That trick of his ofbreaking in on his friends' thoughts with an apropos remark after aquarter of an hour's silence is really very showy and superficial. Hehad some analytical genius, no doubt; but he was by no means such aphenomenon as Poe appeared to imagine."
"Have you read Gaboriau's works?" I asked. "Does Lecoq come up toyour idea of a detective?"
Sherlock Holmes sniffed sardonically. "Lecoq was a miserablebungler," he said, in an angry voice; "he had only one thing torecommend him, and that was his energy. That book made me positivelyill. The question was how to identify an unknown prisoner. I couldhave done it in twenty-four hours. Lecoq took six months or so. Itmight be made a text-book for detectives to teach them what toavoid."
I felt rather indignant at having two characters whom I had admiredtreated in this cavalier style. I walked over to the window, andstood looking out into the busy street. "This fellow may be veryclever," I said to myself, "but he is certainly very conceited."
"There are no crimes and no criminals in these days," he said,querulously. "What is the use of having brains in our profession? Iknow well that I have it in me to make my name famous. No man livesor has ever lived who has brought the same amount of study and ofnatural talent to the detection of crime which I have done. And whatis the result? There is no crime to detect, or, at most, somebungling villany with a motive so transparent that even a ScotlandYard official can see through it."
I was still annoyed at his bumptious style of conversation. I thoughtit best to change the topic.
"I wonder what that fellow is looking for?" I asked, pointing to astalwart, plainly-dressed individual who was walking slowly down theother side of the street, looking anxiously at the numbers. He had alarge blue envelope in his hand, and was evidently the bearer of amessage.
"You mean the retired sergeant of Marines," said Sherlock Holmes.
"Brag and bounce!" thought I to myself. "He knows that I cannotverify his guess."
The thought had hardly passed through my mind when the man whom wewere watching caught sight of the number on our door, and ran rapidlyacross the roadway. We heard a loud knock, a deep voice below, andheavy steps ascending the stair.
"For Mr. Sherlock Holmes," he said, stepping into the room andhanding my friend the letter.
Here was an opportunity of taking the conceit out of him. He littlethought of this when he made that random shot. "May I ask, my lad," Isaid, in the blandest voice, "what your trade may be?"
"Commissionaire, sir," he said, gruffly. "Uniform away for repairs."
"And you were?" I asked, with a slightly malicious glance at mycompanion.
"A sergeant, sir, Royal Marine Light Infantry, sir. No answer? Right,sir."
He clicked his heels together, raised his hand in a salute, and wasgone.




     CHAPTER III     The Lauriston Garden Mystery

I confess that I was considerably startled by this fresh proof of thepractical nature of my companion's theories. My respect for hispowers of analysis increased wondrously. There still remained somelurking suspicion in my mind, however, that the whole thing was apre-arranged episode, intended to dazzle me, though what earthlyobject he could have in taking me in was past my comprehension. WhenI looked at him he had finished reading the note, and his eyes hadassumed the vacant, lack-lustre expression which showed mentalabstraction.
"How in the world did you deduce that?" I asked.
"Deduce what?" said he, petulantly.
"Why, that he was a retired sergeant of Marines."
"I have no time for trifles," he answered, brusquely; then with asmile, "Excuse my rudeness. You broke the thread of my thoughts; butperhaps it is as well. So you actually were not able to see that thatman was a sergeant of Marines?"
"No, indeed."
"It was easier to know it than to explain why I knew it. If you wereasked to prove that two and two made four, you might find somedifficulty, and yet you are quite sure of the fact. Even across thestreet I could see a great blue anchor tattooed on the back of thefellow's hand. That smacked of the sea. He had a military carriage,however, and regulation side whiskers. There we have the marine. Hewas a man with some amount of self-importance and a certain air ofcommand. You must have observed the way in which he held his head andswung his cane. A steady, respectable, middle-aged man, too, on theface of him--all facts which led me to believe that he had been asergeant."
"Wonderful!" I ejaculated.
"Commonplace," said Holmes, though I thought from his expression thathe was pleased at my evident surprise and admiration. "I said justnow that there were no criminals. It appears that I am wrong--look atthis!" He threw me over the note which the commissionaire hadbrought.
"Why," I cried, as I cast my eye over it, "this is terrible!"
"It does seem to be a little out of the common," he remarked, calmly."Would you mind reading it to me aloud?"
This is the letter which I read to him--
"My dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes:"There has been a bad business during the night at 3, LauristonGardens, off the Brixton Road. Our man on the beat saw a light thereabout two in the morning, and as the house was an empty one,suspected that something was amiss. He found the door open, and inthe front room, which is bare of furniture, discovered the body of agentleman, well dressed, and having cards in his pocket bearing thename of 'Enoch J. Drebber, Cleveland, Ohio, U.S.A.' There had been norobbery, nor is there any evidence as to how the man met his death.There are marks of blood in the room, but there is no wound upon hisperson. We are at a loss as to how he came into the empty house;indeed, the whole affair is a puzzler. If you can come round to thehouse any time before twelve, you will find me there. I have lefteverything in statu quo until I hear from you. If you are unable tocome I shall give you fuller details, and would esteem it a greatkindness if you would favour me with your opinion."Yours faithfully,"Tobias Gregson."
"Gregson is the smartest of the Scotland Yarders," my friendremarked; "he and Lestrade are the pick of a bad lot. They are bothquick and energetic, but conventional--shockingly so. They have theirknives into one another, too. They are as jealous as a pair ofprofessional beauties. There will be some fun over this case if theyare both put upon the scent."
I was amazed at the calm way in which he rippled on. "Surely there isnot a moment to be lost," I cried, "shall I go and order you a cab?"
"I'm not sure about whether I shall go. I am the most incurably lazydevil that ever stood in shoe leather--that is, when the fit is onme, for I can be spry enough at times."
"Why, it is just such a chance as you have been longing for."
"My dear fellow, what does it matter to me. Supposing I unravel thewhole matter, you may be sure that Gregson, Lestrade, and Co. willpocket all the credit. That comes of being an unofficial personage."
"But he begs you to help him."
"Yes. He knows that I am his superior, and acknowledges it to me; buthe would cut his tongue out before he would own it to any thirdperson. However, we may as well go and have a look. I shall work itout on my own hook. I may have a laugh at them if I have nothingelse. Come on!"
He hustled on his overcoat, and bustled about in a way that showedthat an energetic fit had superseded the apathetic one.
"Get your hat," he said.
"You wish me to come?"
"Yes, if you have nothing better to do." A minute later we were bothin a hansom, driving furiously for the Brixton Road.
It was a foggy, cloudy morning, and a dun-coloured veil hung over thehouse-tops, looking like the reflection of the mud-coloured streetsbeneath. My companion was in the best of spirits, and prattled awayabout Cremona fiddles, and the difference between a Stradivarius andan Amati. As for myself, I was silent, for the dull weather and themelancholy business upon which we were engaged, depressed my spirits.
"You don't seem to give much thought to the matter in hand," I saidat last, interrupting Holmes' musical disquisition.
"No data yet," he answered. "It is a capital mistake to theorizebefore you have all the evidence. It biases the judgment."
"You will have your data soon," I remarked, pointing with my finger;"this is the Brixton Road, and that is the house, if I am not verymuch mistaken."
"So it is. Stop, driver, stop!" We were still a hundred yards or sofrom it, but he insisted upon our alighting, and we finished ourjourney upon foot.
Number 3, Lauriston Gardens wore an ill-omened and minatory look. Itwas one of four which stood back some little way from the street, twobeing occupied and two empty. The latter looked out with three tiersof vacant melancholy windows, which were blank and dreary, save thathere and there a "To Let" card had developed like a cataract upon thebleared panes. A small garden sprinkled over with a scatterederuption of sickly plants separated each of these houses from thestreet, and was traversed by a narrow pathway, yellowish in colour,and consisting apparently of a mixture of clay and of gravel. Thewhole place was very sloppy from the rain which had fallen throughthe night. The garden was bounded by a three-foot brick wall with afringe of wood rails upon the top, and against this wall was leaninga stalwart police constable, surrounded by a small knot of loafers,who craned their necks and strained their eyes in the vain hope ofcatching some glimpse of the proceedings within.
I had imagined that Sherlock Holmes would at once have hurried intothe house and plunged into a study of the mystery. Nothing appearedto be further from his intention. With an air of nonchalance which,under the circumstances, seemed to me to border upon affectation, helounged up and down the pavement, and gazed vacantly at the ground,the sky, the opposite houses and the line of railings. Havingfinished his scrutiny, he proceeded slowly down the path, or ratherdown the fringe of grass which flanked the path, keeping his eyesriveted upon the ground. Twice he stopped, and once I saw him smile,and heard him utter an exclamation of satisfaction. There were manymarks of footsteps upon the wet clayey soil, but since the police hadbeen coming and going over it, I was unable to see how my companioncould hope to learn anything from it. Still I had had suchextraordinary evidence of the quickness of his perceptive faculties,that I had no doubt that he could see a great deal which was hiddenfrom me.
At the door of the house we were met by a tall, white-faced,flaxen-haired man, with a notebook in his hand, who rushed forwardand wrung my companion's hand with effusion. "It is indeed kind ofyou to come," he said, "I have had everything left untouched."
"Except that!" my friend answered, pointing at the pathway. "If aherd of buffaloes had passed along there could not be a greater mess.No doubt, however, you had drawn your own conclusions, Gregson,before you permitted this."
"I have had so much to do inside the house," the detective saidevasively. "My colleague, Mr. Lestrade, is here. I had relied uponhim to look after this."
Holmes glanced at me and raised his eyebrows sardonically. "With twosuch men as yourself and Lestrade upon the ground, there will not bemuch for a third party to find out," he said.
Gregson rubbed his hands in a self-satisfied way. "I think we havedone all that can be done," he answered; "it's a queer case though,and I knew your taste for such things."
"You did not come here in a cab?" asked Sherlock Holmes.
"No, sir."
"Nor Lestrade?"
"No, sir."
"Then let us go and look at the room." With which inconsequent remarkhe strode on into the house, followed by Gregson, whose featuresexpressed his astonishment.
A short passage, bare planked and dusty, led to the kitchen andoffices. Two doors opened out of it to the left and to the right. Oneof these had obviously been closed for many weeks. The other belongedto the dining-room, which was the apartment in which the mysteriousaffair had occurred. Holmes walked in, and I followed him with thatsubdued feeling at my heart which the presence of death inspires.
It was a large square room, looking all the larger from the absenceof all furniture. A vulgar flaring paper adorned the walls, but itwas blotched in places with mildew, and here and there great stripshad become detached and hung down, exposing the yellow plasterbeneath. Opposite the door was a showy fireplace, surmounted by amantelpiece of imitation white marble. On one corner of this wasstuck the stump of a red wax candle. The solitary window was so dirtythat the light was hazy and uncertain, giving a dull grey tinge toeverything, which was intensified by the thick layer of dust whichcoated the whole apartment.
All these details I observed afterwards. At present my attention wascentred upon the single grim motionless figure which lay stretchedupon the boards, with vacant sightless eyes staring up at thediscoloured ceiling. It was that of a man about forty-three orforty-four years of age, middle-sized, broad shouldered, with crispcurling black hair, and a short stubbly beard. He was dressed in aheavy broadcloth frock coat and waistcoat, with light-colouredtrousers, and immaculate collar and cuffs. A top hat, well brushedand trim, was placed upon the floor beside him. His hands wereclenched and his arms thrown abroad, while his lower limbs wereinterlocked as though his death struggle had been a grievous one. Onhis rigid face there stood an expression of horror, and as it seemedto me, of hatred, such as I have never seen upon human features. Thismalignant and terrible contortion, combined with the low forehead,blunt nose, and prognathous jaw gave the dead man a singularlysimious and ape-like appearance, which was increased by his writhing,unnatural posture. I have seen death in many forms, but never has itappeared to me in a more fearsome aspect than in that dark grimyapartment, which looked out upon one of the main arteries of suburbanLondon.
Lestrade, lean and ferret-like as ever, was standing by the doorway,and greeted my companion and myself.
"This case will make a stir, sir," he remarked. "It beats anything Ihave seen, and I am no chicken."
"There is no clue?" said Gregson.
"None at all," chimed in Lestrade.
Sherlock Holmes approached the body, and, kneeling down, examined itintently. "You are sure that there is no wound?" he asked, pointingto numerous gouts and splashes of blood which lay all round.
"Positive!" cried both detectives.
"Then, of course, this blood belongs to a secondindividual--presumably the murderer, if murder has been committed. Itreminds me of the circumstances attendant on the death of Van Jansen,in Utrecht, in the year '34. Do you remember the case, Gregson?"
"No, sir."
"Read it up--you really should. There is nothing new under the sun.It has all been done before."
As he spoke, his nimble fingers were flying here, there, andeverywhere, feeling, pressing, unbuttoning, examining, while his eyeswore the same far-away expression which I have already remarked upon.So swiftly was the examination made, that one would hardly haveguessed the minuteness with which it was conducted. Finally, hesniffed the dead man's lips, and then glanced at the soles of hispatent leather boots.
"He has not been moved at all?" he asked.
"No more than was necessary for the purposes of our examination."
"You can take him to the mortuary now," he said. "There is nothingmore to be learned."
Gregson had a stretcher and four men at hand. At his call theyentered the room, and the stranger was lifted and carried out. Asthey raised him, a ring tinkled down and rolled across the floor.Lestrade grabbed it up and stared at it with mystified eyes.
"There's been a woman here," he cried. "It's a woman's wedding-ring."
He held it out, as he spoke, upon the palm of his hand. We allgathered round him and gazed at it. There could be no doubt that thatcirclet of plain gold had once adorned the finger of a bride.
"This complicates matters," said Gregson. "Heaven knows, they werecomplicated enough before."
"You're sure it doesn't simplify them?" observed Holmes. "There'snothing to be learned by staring at it. What did you find in hispockets?"
"We have it all here," said Gregson, pointing to a litter of objectsupon one of the bottom steps of the stairs. "A gold watch, No. 97163,by Barraud, of London. Gold Albert chain, very heavy and solid. Goldring, with masonic device. Gold pin--bull-dog's head, with rubies aseyes. Russian leather card-case, with cards of Enoch J. Drebber ofCleveland, corresponding with the E. J. D. upon the linen. No purse,but loose money to the extent of seven pounds thirteen. Pocketedition of Boccaccio's 'Decameron,' with name of Joseph Stangersonupon the fly-leaf. Two letters--one addressed to E. J. Drebber andone to Joseph Stangerson."
"At what address?"
"American Exchange, Strand--to be left till called for. They are bothfrom the Guion Steamship Company, and refer to the sailing of theirboats from Liverpool. It is clear that this unfortunate man was aboutto return to New York."
"Have you made any inquiries as to this man, Stangerson?"
"I did it at once, sir," said Gregson. "I have had advertisementssent to all the newspapers, and one of my men has gone to theAmerican Exchange, but he has not returned yet."
"Have you sent to Cleveland?"
"We telegraphed this morning."
"How did you word your inquiries?"
"We simply detailed the circumstances, and said that we should beglad of any information which could help us."
"You did not ask for particulars on any point which appeared to youto be crucial?"
"I asked about Stangerson."
"Nothing else? Is there no circumstance on which this whole caseappears to hinge? Will you not telegraph again?"
"I have said all I have to say," said Gregson, in an offended voice.
Sherlock Holmes chuckled to himself, and appeared to be about to makesome remark, when Lestrade, who had been in the front room while wewere holding this conversation in the hall, reappeared upon thescene, rubbing his hands in a pompous and self-satisfied manner.
"Mr. Gregson," he said, "I have just made a discovery of the highestimportance, and one which would have been overlooked had I not made acareful examination of the walls."
The little man's eyes sparkled as he spoke, and he was evidently in astate of suppressed exultation at having scored a point against hiscolleague.
"Come here," he said, bustling back into the room, the atmosphere ofwhich felt clearer since the removal of its ghastly inmate. "Now,stand there!"
He struck a match on his boot and held it up against the wall.
"Look at that!" he said, triumphantly.
I have remarked that the paper had fallen away in parts. In thisparticular corner of the room a large piece had peeled off, leaving ayellow square of coarse plastering. Across this bare space there wasscrawled in blood-red letters a single word--
                                RACHE.
"What do you think of that?" cried the detective, with the air of ashowman exhibiting his show. "This was overlooked because it was inthe darkest corner of the room, and no one thought of looking there.The murderer has written it with his or her own blood. See this smearwhere it has trickled down the wall! That disposes of the idea ofsuicide anyhow. Why was that corner chosen to write it on? I willtell you. See that candle on the mantelpiece. It was lit at the time,and if it was lit this corner would be the brightest instead of thedarkest portion of the wall."
"And what does it mean now that you have found it?" asked Gregson ina depreciatory voice.
"Mean? Why, it means that the writer was going to put the female nameRachel, but was disturbed before he or she had time to finish. Youmark my words, when this case comes to be cleared up you will findthat a woman named Rachel has something to do with it. It's all verywell for you to laugh, Mr. Sherlock Holmes. You may be very smart andclever, but the old hound is the best, when all is said and done."
"I really beg your pardon!" said my companion, who had ruffled thelittle man's temper by bursting into an explosion of laughter. "Youcertainly have the credit of being the first of us to find this out,and, as you say, it bears every mark of having been written by theother participant in last night's mystery. I have not had time toexamine this room yet, but with your permission I shall do so now."
As he spoke, he whipped a tape measure and a large round magnifyingglass from his pocket. With these two implements he trottednoiselessly about the room, sometimes stopping, occasionallykneeling, and once lying flat upon his face. So engrossed was he withhis occupation that he appeared to have forgotten our presence, forhe chattered away to himself under his breath the whole time, keepingup a running fire of exclamations, groans, whistles, and little criessuggestive of encouragement and of hope. As I watched him I wasirresistibly reminded of a pure-blooded well-trained foxhound as itdashes backwards and forwards through the covert, whining in itseagerness, until it comes across the lost scent. For twenty minutesor more he continued his researches, measuring with the most exactcare the distance between marks which were entirely invisible to me,and occasionally applying his tape to the walls in an equallyincomprehensible manner. In one place he gathered up very carefully alittle pile of grey dust from the floor, and packed it away in anenvelope. Finally, he examined with his glass the word upon the wall,going over every letter of it with the most minute exactness. Thisdone, he appeared to be satisfied, for he replaced his tape and hisglass in his pocket.
"They say that genius is an infinite capacity for taking pains," heremarked with a smile. "It's a very bad definition, but it does applyto detective work."
Gregson and Lestrade had watched the manoeuvres of their amateurcompanion with considerable curiosity and some contempt. Theyevidently failed to appreciate the fact, which I had begun torealize, that Sherlock Holmes' smallest actions were all directedtowards some definite and practical end.
"What do you think of it, sir?" they both asked.
"It would be robbing you of the credit of the case if I was topresume to help you," remarked my friend. "You are doing so well nowthat it would be a pity for anyone to interfere." There was a worldof sarcasm in his voice as he spoke. "If you will let me know howyour investigations go," he continued, "I shall be happy to give youany help I can. In the meantime I should like to speak to theconstable who found the body. Can you give me his name and address?"
Lestrade glanced at his note-book. "John Rance," he said. "He is offduty now. You will find him at 46, Audley Court, Kennington ParkGate."
Holmes took a note of the address.
"Come along, Doctor," he said; "we shall go and look him up. I'lltell you one thing which may help you in the case," he continued,turning to the two detectives. "There has been murder done, and themurderer was a man. He was more than six feet high, was in the primeof life, had small feet for his height, wore coarse, square-toedboots and smoked a Trichinopoly cigar. He came here with his victimin a four-wheeled cab, which was drawn by a horse with three oldshoes and one new one on his off fore leg. In all probability themurderer had a florid face, and the finger-nails of his right handwere remarkably long. These are only a few indications, but they mayassist you."
Lestrade and Gregson glanced at each other with an incredulous smile.
"If this man was murdered, how was it done?" asked the former.
"Poison," said Sherlock Holmes curtly, and strode off. "One otherthing, Lestrade," he added, turning round at the door: "'Rache,' isthe German for 'revenge;' so don't lose your time looking for MissRachel."
With which Parthian shot he walked away, leaving the two rivalsopen-mouthed behind him. 




     CHAPTER IV     What John Rance Had To Tell

It was one o'clock when we left No. 3, Lauriston Gardens. SherlockHolmes led me to the nearest telegraph office, whence he dispatched along telegram. He then hailed a cab, and ordered the driver to takeus to the address given us by Lestrade.
"There is nothing like first hand evidence," he remarked; "as amatter of fact, my mind is entirely made up upon the case, but stillwe may as well learn all that is to be learned."
"You amaze me, Holmes," said I. "Surely you are not as sure as youpretend to be of all those particulars which you gave."
"There's no room for a mistake," he answered. "The very first thingwhich I observed on arriving there was that a cab had made two rutswith its wheels close to the curb. Now, up to last night, we have hadno rain for a week, so that those wheels which left such a deepimpression must have been there during the night. There were themarks of the horse's hoofs, too, the outline of one of which was farmore clearly cut than that of the other three, showing that that wasa new shoe. Since the cab was there after the rain began, and was notthere at any time during the morning--I have Gregson's word forthat--it follows that it must have been there during the night, and,therefore, that it brought those two individuals to the house."
"That seems simple enough," said I; "but how about the other man'sheight?"
"Why, the height of a man, in nine cases out of ten, can be told fromthe length of his stride. It is a simple calculation enough, thoughthere is no use my boring you with figures. I had this fellow'sstride both on the clay outside and on the dust within. Then I had away of checking my calculation. When a man writes on a wall, hisinstinct leads him to write about the level of his own eyes. Now thatwriting was just over six feet from the ground. It was child's play."
"And his age?" I asked.
"Well, if a man can stride four and a-half feet without the smallesteffort, he can't be quite in the sere and yellow. That was thebreadth of a puddle on the garden walk which he had evidently walkedacross. Patent-leather boots had gone round, and Square-toes hadhopped over. There is no mystery about it at all. I am simplyapplying to ordinary life a few of those precepts of observation anddeduction which I advocated in that article. Is there anything elsethat puzzles you?"
"The finger nails and the Trichinopoly," I suggested.
"The writing on the wall was done with a man's forefinger dipped inblood. My glass allowed me to observe that the plaster was slightlyscratched in doing it, which would not have been the case if theman's nail had been trimmed. I gathered up some scattered ash fromthe floor. It was dark in colour and flakey--such an ash as is onlymade by a Trichinopoly. I have made a special study of cigarashes--in fact, I have written a monograph upon the subject. Iflatter myself that I can distinguish at a glance the ash of anyknown brand, either of cigar or of tobacco. It is just in suchdetails that the skilled detective differs from the Gregson andLestrade type."
"And the florid face?" I asked.
"Ah, that was a more daring shot, though I have no doubt that I wasright. You must not ask me that at the present state of the affair."
I passed my hand over my brow. "My head is in a whirl," I remarked;"the more one thinks of it the more mysterious it grows. How camethese two men--if there were two men--into an empty house? What hasbecome of the cabman who drove them? How could one man compel anotherto take poison? Where did the blood come from? What was the object ofthe murderer, since robbery had no part in it? How came the woman'sring there? Above all, why should the second man write up the Germanword RACHE before decamping? I confess that I cannot see any possibleway of reconciling all these facts."
My companion smiled approvingly.
"You sum up the difficulties of the situation succinctly and well,"he said. "There is much that is still obscure, though I have quitemade up my mind on the main facts. As to poor Lestrade's discovery itwas simply a blind intended to put the police upon a wrong track, bysuggesting Socialism and secret societies. It was not done by aGerman. The A, if you noticed, was printed somewhat after the Germanfashion. Now, a real German invariably prints in the Latin character,so that we may safely say that this was not written by one, but by aclumsy imitator who overdid his part. It was simply a ruse to divertinquiry into a wrong channel. I'm not going to tell you much more ofthe case, Doctor. You know a conjuror gets no credit when once he hasexplained his trick, and if I show you too much of my method ofworking, you will come to the conclusion that I am a very ordinaryindividual after all."
"I shall never do that," I answered; "you have brought detection asnear an exact science as it ever will be brought in this world."
My companion flushed up with pleasure at my words, and the earnestway in which I uttered them. I had already observed that he was assensitive to flattery on the score of his art as any girl could be ofher beauty.
"I'll tell you one other thing," he said. "Patent-leathers andSquare-toes came in the same cab, and they walked down the pathwaytogether as friendly as possible--arm-in-arm, in all probability.When they got inside they walked up and down the room--or rather,Patent-leathers stood still while Square-toes walked up and down. Icould read all that in the dust; and I could read that as he walkedhe grew more and more excited. That is shown by the increased lengthof his strides. He was talking all the while, and working himself up,no doubt, into a fury. Then the tragedy occurred. I've told you all Iknow myself now, for the rest is mere surmise and conjecture. We havea good working basis, however, on which to start. We must hurry up,for I want to go to Halle's concert to hear Norman Neruda thisafternoon."
This conversation had occurred while our cab had been threading itsway through a long succession of dingy streets and dreary by-ways. Inthe dingiest and dreariest of them our driver suddenly came to astand. "That's Audley Court in there," he said, pointing to a narrowslit in the line of dead-coloured brick. "You'll find me here whenyou come back."
Audley Court was not an attractive locality. The narrow passage ledus into a quadrangle paved with flags and lined by sordid dwellings.We picked our way among groups of dirty children, and through linesof discoloured linen, until we came to Number 46, the door of whichwas decorated with a small slip of brass on which the name Rance wasengraved. On enquiry we found that the constable was in bed, and wewere shown into a little front parlour to await his coming.
He appeared presently, looking a little irritable at being disturbedin his slumbers. "I made my report at the office," he said.
Holmes took a half-sovereign from his pocket and played with itpensively. "We thought that we should like to hear it all from yourown lips," he said.
"I shall be most happy to tell you anything I can," the constableanswered with his eyes upon the little golden disk.
"Just let us hear it all in your own way as it occurred."
Rance sat down on the horsehair sofa, and knitted his brows as thoughdetermined not to omit anything in his narrative.
"I'll tell it ye from the beginning," he said. "My time is from tenat night to six in the morning. At eleven there was a fight at the'White Hart'; but bar that all was quiet enough on the beat. At oneo'clock it began to rain, and I met Harry Murcher--him who has theHolland Grove beat--and we stood together at the corner of HenriettaStreet a-talkin'. Presently--maybe about two or a little after--Ithought I would take a look round and see that all was right down theBrixton Road. It was precious dirty and lonely. Not a soul did I meetall the way down, though a cab or two went past me. I was a strollin'down, thinkin' between ourselves how uncommon handy a four of gin hotwould be, when suddenly the glint of a light caught my eye in thewindow of that same house. Now, I knew that them two houses inLauriston Gardens was empty on account of him that owns them whowon't have the drains seed to, though the very last tenant what livedin one of them died o' typhoid fever. I was knocked all in a heaptherefore at seeing a light in the window, and I suspected assomething was wrong. When I got to the door--"
"You stopped, and then walked back to the garden gate," my companioninterrupted. "What did you do that for?"
Rance gave a violent jump, and stared at Sherlock Holmes with theutmost amazement upon his features.
"Why, that's true, sir," he said; "though how you come to know it,Heaven only knows. Ye see, when I got up to the door it was so stilland so lonesome, that I thought I'd be none the worse for some onewith me. I ain't afeared of anything on this side o' the grave; but Ithought that maybe it was him that died o' the typhoid inspecting thedrains what killed him. The thought gave me a kind o' turn, and Iwalked back to the gate to see if I could see Murcher's lantern, butthere wasn't no sign of him nor of anyone else."
"There was no one in the street?"
"Not a livin' soul, sir, nor as much as a dog. Then I pulled myselftogether and went back and pushed the door open. All was quietinside, so I went into the room where the light was a-burnin'. Therewas a candle flickerin' on the mantelpiece--a red wax one--and by itslight I saw--"
"Yes, I know all that you saw. You walked round the room severaltimes, and you knelt down by the body, and then you walked throughand tried the kitchen door, and then--"
John Rance sprang to his feet with a frightened face and suspicion inhis eyes. "Where was you hid to see all that?" he cried. "It seems tome that you knows a deal more than you should."
Holmes laughed and threw his card across the table to the constable."Don't get arresting me for the murder," he said. "I am one of thehounds and not the wolf; Mr. Gregson or Mr. Lestrade will answer forthat. Go on, though. What did you do next?"
Rance resumed his seat, without however losing his mystifiedexpression. "I went back to the gate and sounded my whistle. Thatbrought Murcher and two more to the spot."
"Was the street empty then?"
"Well, it was, as far as anybody that could be of any good goes."
"What do you mean?"
The constable's features broadened into a grin. "I've seen many adrunk chap in my time," he said, "but never anyone so cryin' drunk asthat cove. He was at the gate when I came out, a-leanin' up ag'in therailings, and a-singin' at the pitch o' his lungs about Columbine'sNew-fangled Banner, or some such stuff. He couldn't stand, far lesshelp."
"What sort of a man was he?" asked Sherlock Holmes.
John Rance appeared to be somewhat irritated at this digression. "Hewas an uncommon drunk sort o' man," he said. "He'd ha' found hisselfin the station if we hadn't been so took up."
"His face--his dress--didn't you notice them?" Holmes broke inimpatiently.
"I should think I did notice them, seeing that I had to prop himup--me and Murcher between us. He was a long chap, with a red face,the lower part muffled round--"
"That will do," cried Holmes. "What became of him?"
"We'd enough to do without lookin' after him," the policeman said, inan aggrieved voice. "I'll wager he found his way home all right."
"How was he dressed?"
"A brown overcoat."
"Had he a whip in his hand?"
"A whip--no."
"He must have left it behind," muttered my companion. "You didn'thappen to see or hear a cab after that?"
"No."
"There's a half-sovereign for you," my companion said, standing upand taking his hat. "I am afraid, Rance, that you will never rise inthe force. That head of yours should be for use as well as ornament.You might have gained your sergeant's stripes last night. The manwhom you held in your hands is the man who holds the clue of thismystery, and whom we are seeking. There is no use of arguing about itnow; I tell you that it is so. Come along, Doctor."
We started off for the cab together, leaving our informantincredulous, but obviously uncomfortable.
"The blundering fool," Holmes said, bitterly, as we drove back to ourlodgings. "Just to think of his having such an incomparable bit ofgood luck, and not taking advantage of it."
"I am rather in the dark still. It is true that the description ofthis man tallies with your idea of the second party in this mystery.But why should he come back to the house after leaving it? That isnot the way of criminals."
"The ring, man, the ring: that was what he came back for. If we haveno other way of catching him, we can always bait our line with thering. I shall have him, Doctor--I'll lay you two to one that I havehim. I must thank you for it all. I might not have gone but for you,and so have missed the finest study I ever came across: a study inscarlet, eh? Why shouldn't we use a little art jargon. There's thescarlet thread of murder running through the colourless skein oflife, and our duty is to unravel it, and isolate it, and expose everyinch of it. And now for lunch, and then for Norman Neruda. Her attackand her bowing are splendid. What's that little thing of Chopin's sheplays so magnificently: Tra-la-la-lira-lira-lay."
Leaning back in the cab, this amateur bloodhound carolled away like alark while I meditated upon the many-sidedness of the human mind.




     CHAPTER V     Our Advertisement Brings A Visitor

Our morning's exertions had been too much for my weak health, and Iwas tired out in the afternoon. After Holmes' departure for theconcert, I lay down upon the sofa and endeavoured to get a couple ofhours' sleep. It was a useless attempt. My mind had been too muchexcited by all that had occurred, and the strangest fancies andsurmises crowded into it. Every time that I closed my eyes I sawbefore me the distorted baboon-like countenance of the murdered man.So sinister was the impression which that face had produced upon methat I found it difficult to feel anything but gratitude for him whohad removed its owner from the world. If ever human features bespokevice of the most malignant type, they were certainly those of EnochJ. Drebber, of Cleveland. Still I recognized that justice must bedone, and that the depravity of the victim was no condonement in theeyes of the law.
The more I thought of it the more extraordinary did my companion'shypothesis, that the man had been poisoned, appear. I remembered howhe had sniffed his lips, and had no doubt that he had detectedsomething which had given rise to the idea. Then, again, if notpoison, what had caused the man's death, since there was neitherwound nor marks of strangulation? But, on the other hand, whose bloodwas that which lay so thickly upon the floor? There were no signs ofa struggle, nor had the victim any weapon with which he might havewounded an antagonist. As long as all these questions were unsolved,I felt that sleep would be no easy matter, either for Holmes ormyself. His quiet self-confident manner convinced me that he hadalready formed a theory which explained all the facts, though what itwas I could not for an instant conjecture.
He was very late in returning--so late, that I knew that the concertcould not have detained him all the time. Dinner was on the tablebefore he appeared.
"It was magnificent," he said, as he took his seat. "Do you rememberwhat Darwin says about music? He claims that the power of producingand appreciating it existed among the human race long before thepower of speech was arrived at. Perhaps that is why we are so subtlyinfluenced by it. There are vague memories in our souls of thosemisty centuries when the world was in its childhood."
"That's rather a broad idea," I remarked.
"One's ideas must be as broad as Nature if they are to interpretNature," he answered. "What's the matter? You're not looking quiteyourself. This Brixton Road affair has upset you."
"To tell the truth, it has," I said. "I ought to be morecase-hardened after my Afghan experiences. I saw my own comradeshacked to pieces at Maiwand without losing my nerve."
"I can understand. There is a mystery about this which stimulates theimagination; where there is no imagination there is no horror. Haveyou seen the evening paper?"
"No."
"It gives a fairly good account of the affair. It does not mentionthe fact that when the man was raised up, a woman's wedding ring fellupon the floor. It is just as well it does not."
"Why?"
"Look at this advertisement," he answered. "I had one sent to everypaper this morning immediately after the affair."
He threw the paper across to me and I glanced at the place indicated.It was the first announcement in the "Found" column. "In BrixtonRoad, this morning," it ran, "a plain gold wedding ring, found in theroadway between the 'White Hart' Tavern and Holland Grove. Apply Dr.Watson, 221b, Baker Street, between eight and nine this evening."
"Excuse my using your name," he said. "If I used my own some of thesedunderheads would recognize it, and want to meddle in the affair."
"That is all right," I answered. "But supposing anyone applies, Ihave no ring."
"Oh yes, you have," said he, handing me one. "This will do very well.It is almost a facsimile."
"And who do you expect will answer this advertisement."
"Why, the man in the brown coat--our florid friend with the squaretoes. If he does not come himself he will send an accomplice."
"Would he not consider it as too dangerous?"
"Not at all. If my view of the case is correct, and I have everyreason to believe that it is, this man would rather risk anythingthan lose the ring. According to my notion he dropped it whilestooping over Drebber's body, and did not miss it at the time. Afterleaving the house he discovered his loss and hurried back, but foundthe police already in possession, owing to his own folly in leavingthe candle burning. He had to pretend to be drunk in order to allaythe suspicions which might have been aroused by his appearance at thegate. Now put yourself in that man's place. On thinking the matterover, it must have occurred to him that it was possible that he hadlost the ring in the road after leaving the house. What would he do,then? He would eagerly look out for the evening papers in the hope ofseeing it among the articles found. His eye, of course, would lightupon this. He would be overjoyed. Why should he fear a trap? Therewould be no reason in his eyes why the finding of the ring should beconnected with the murder. He would come. He will come. You shall seehim within an hour."
"And then?" I asked.
"Oh, you can leave me to deal with him then. Have you any arms?"
"I have my old service revolver and a few cartridges."
"You had better clean it and load it. He will be a desperate man, andthough I shall take him unawares, it is as well to be ready foranything."
I went to my bedroom and followed his advice. When I returned withthe pistol the table had been cleared, and Holmes was engaged in hisfavourite occupation of scraping upon his violin.
"The plot thickens," he said, as I entered; "I have just had ananswer to my American telegram. My view of the case is the correctone."
"And that is?" I asked eagerly.
"My fiddle would be the better for new strings," he remarked. "Putyour pistol in your pocket. When the fellow comes speak to him in anordinary way. Leave the rest to me. Don't frighten him by looking athim too hard."
"It is eight o'clock now," I said, glancing at my watch.
"Yes. He will probably be here in a few minutes. Open the doorslightly. That will do. Now put the key on the inside. Thank you!This is a queer old book I picked up at a stall yesterday--De Jureinter Gentes--published in Latin at Liege in the Lowlands, in 1642.Charles' head was still firm on his shoulders when this littlebrown-backed volume was struck off."
"Who is the printer?"
"Philippe de Croy, whoever he may have been. On the fly-leaf, in veryfaded ink, is written 'Ex libris Guliolmi Whyte.' I wonder whoWilliam Whyte was. Some pragmatical seventeenth century lawyer, Isuppose. His writing has a legal twist about it. Here comes our man,I think."
As he spoke there was a sharp ring at the bell. Sherlock Holmes rosesoftly and moved his chair in the direction of the door. We heard theservant pass along the hall, and the sharp click of the latch as sheopened it.
"Does Dr. Watson live here?" asked a clear but rather harsh voice. Wecould not hear the servant's reply, but the door closed, and some onebegan to ascend the stairs. The footfall was an uncertain andshuffling one. A look of surprise passed over the face of mycompanion as he listened to it. It came slowly along the passage, andthere was a feeble tap at the door.
"Come in," I cried.
At my summons, instead of the man of violence whom we expected, avery old and wrinkled woman hobbled into the apartment. She appearedto be dazzled by the sudden blaze of light, and after dropping acurtsey, she stood blinking at us with her bleared eyes and fumblingin her pocket with nervous, shaky fingers. I glanced at my companion,and his face had assumed such a disconsolate expression that it wasall I could do to keep my countenance.
The old crone drew out an evening paper, and pointed at ouradvertisement. "It's this as has brought me, good gentlemen," shesaid, dropping another curtsey; "a gold wedding ring in the BrixtonRoad. It belongs to my girl Sally, as was married only this timetwelvemonth, which her husband is steward aboard a Union boat, andwhat he'd say if he comes 'ome and found her without her ring is morethan I can think, he being short enough at the best o' times, butmore especially when he has the drink. If it please you, she went tothe circus last night along with--"
"Is that her ring?" I asked.
"The Lord be thanked!" cried the old woman; "Sally will be a gladwoman this night. That's the ring."
"And what may your address be?" I inquired, taking up a pencil.
"13, Duncan Street, Houndsditch. A weary way from here."
"The Brixton Road does not lie between any circus and Houndsditch,"said Sherlock Holmes sharply.
The old woman faced round and looked keenly at him from her littlered-rimmed eyes. "The gentleman asked me for my address," she said."Sally lives in lodgings at 3, Mayfield Place, Peckham."
"And your name is--?"
"My name is Sawyer--her's is Dennis, which Tom Dennis marriedher--and a smart, clean lad, too, as long as he's at sea, and nosteward in the company more thought of; but when on shore, what withthe women and what with liquor shops--"
"Here is your ring, Mrs. Sawyer," I interrupted, in obedience to asign from my companion; "it clearly belongs to your daughter, and Iam glad to be able to restore it to the rightful owner."
With many mumbled blessings and protestations of gratitude the oldcrone packed it away in her pocket, and shuffled off down the stairs.Sherlock Holmes sprang to his feet the moment that she was gone andrushed into his room. He returned in a few seconds enveloped in anulster and a cravat. "I'll follow her," he said, hurriedly; "she mustbe an accomplice, and will lead me to him. Wait up for me." The halldoor had hardly slammed behind our visitor before Holmes haddescended the stair. Looking through the window I could see herwalking feebly along the other side, while her pursuer dogged hersome little distance behind. "Either his whole theory is incorrect,"I thought to myself, "or else he will be led now to the heart of themystery." There was no need for him to ask me to wait up for him, forI felt that sleep was impossible until I heard the result of hisadventure.
It was close upon nine when he set out. I had no idea how long hemight be, but I sat stolidly puffing at my pipe and skipping over thepages of Henri Murger's Vie de Bohme. Ten o'clock passed, and Iheard the footsteps of the maid as they pattered off to bed. Eleven,and the more stately tread of the landlady passed my door, bound forthe same destination. It was close upon twelve before I heard thesharp sound of his latch-key. The instant he entered I saw by hisface that he had not been successful. Amusement and chagrin seemed tobe struggling for the mastery, until the former suddenly carried theday, and he burst into a hearty laugh.
"I wouldn't have the Scotland Yarders know it for the world," hecried, dropping into his chair; "I have chaffed them so much thatthey would never have let me hear the end of it. I can afford tolaugh, because I know that I will be even with them in the long run."
"What is it then?" I asked.
"Oh, I don't mind telling a story against myself. That creature hadgone a little way when she began to limp and show every sign of beingfoot-sore. Presently she came to a halt, and hailed a four-wheelerwhich was passing. I managed to be close to her so as to hear theaddress, but I need not have been so anxious, for she sang it outloud enough to be heard at the other side of the street, 'Drive to13, Duncan Street, Houndsditch,' she cried. This begins to lookgenuine, I thought, and having seen her safely inside, I perchedmyself behind. That's an art which every detective should be anexpert at. Well, away we rattled, and never drew rein until wereached the street in question. I hopped off before we came to thedoor, and strolled down the street in an easy, lounging way. I sawthe cab pull up. The driver jumped down, and I saw him open the doorand stand expectantly. Nothing came out though. When I reached him hewas groping about frantically in the empty cab, and giving vent tothe finest assorted collection of oaths that ever I listened to.There was no sign or trace of his passenger, and I fear it will besome time before he gets his fare. On inquiring at Number 13 we foundthat the house belonged to a respectable paperhanger, named Keswick,and that no one of the name either of Sawyer or Dennis had ever beenheard of there."
"You don't mean to say," I cried, in amazement, "that that tottering,feeble old woman was able to get out of the cab while it was inmotion, without either you or the driver seeing her?"
"Old woman be damned!" said Sherlock Holmes, sharply. "We were theold women to be so taken in. It must have been a young man, and anactive one, too, besides being an incomparable actor. The get-up wasinimitable. He saw that he was followed, no doubt, and used thismeans of giving me the slip. It shows that the man we are after isnot as lonely as I imagined he was, but has friends who are ready torisk something for him. Now, Doctor, you are looking done-up. Take myadvice and turn in."
I was certainly feeling very weary, so I obeyed his injunction. Ileft Holmes seated in front of the smouldering fire, and long intothe watches of the night I heard the low, melancholy wailings of hisviolin, and knew that he was still pondering over the strange problemwhich he had set himself to unravel.




     CHAPTER VI     Tobias Gregson Shows What He Can Do

The papers next day were full of the "Brixton Mystery," as theytermed it. Each had a long account of the affair, and some hadleaders upon it in addition. There was some information in them whichwas new to me. I still retain in my scrap-book numerous clippings andextracts bearing upon the case. Here is a condensation of a few ofthem:--
The Daily Telegraph remarked that in the history of crime there hadseldom been a tragedy which presented stranger features. The Germanname of the victim, the absence of all other motive, and the sinisterinscription on the wall, all pointed to its perpetration by politicalrefugees and revolutionists. The Socialists had many branches inAmerica, and the deceased had, no doubt, infringed their unwrittenlaws, and been tracked down by them. After alluding airily to theVehmgericht, aqua tofana, Carbonari, the Marchioness de Brinvilliers,the Darwinian theory, the principles of Malthus, and the RatcliffHighway murders, the article concluded by admonishing the Governmentand advocating a closer watch over foreigners in England.
The Standard commented upon the fact that lawless outrages of thesort usually occurred under a Liberal Administration. They arose fromthe unsettling of the minds of the masses, and the consequentweakening of all authority. The deceased was an American gentlemanwho had been residing for some weeks in the Metropolis. He had stayedat the boarding-house of Madame Charpentier, in Torquay Terrace,Camberwell. He was accompanied in his travels by his privatesecretary, Mr. Joseph Stangerson. The two bade adieu to theirlandlady upon Tuesday, the 4th inst., and departed to Euston Stationwith the avowed intention of catching the Liverpool express. Theywere afterwards seen together upon the platform. Nothing more isknown of them until Mr. Drebber's body was, as recorded, discoveredin an empty house in the Brixton Road, many miles from Euston. How hecame there, or how he met his fate, are questions which are stillinvolved in mystery. Nothing is known of the whereabouts ofStangerson. We are glad to learn that Mr. Lestrade and Mr. Gregson,of Scotland Yard, are both engaged upon the case, and it isconfidently anticipated that these well-known officers will speedilythrow light upon the matter.
The Daily News observed that there was no doubt as to the crime beinga political one. The despotism and hatred of Liberalism whichanimated the Continental Governments had had the effect of driving toour shores a number of men who might have made excellent citizenswere they not soured by the recollection of all that they hadundergone. Among these men there was a stringent code of honour, anyinfringement of which was punished by death. Every effort should bemade to find the secretary, Stangerson, and to ascertain someparticulars of the habits of the deceased. A great step had beengained by the discovery of the address of the house at which he hadboarded--a result which was entirely due to the acuteness and energyof Mr. Gregson of Scotland Yard.
Sherlock Holmes and I read these notices over together at breakfast,and they appeared to afford him considerable amusement.
"I told you that, whatever happened, Lestrade and Gregson would besure to score."
"That depends on how it turns out."
"Oh, bless you, it doesn't matter in the least. If the man is caught,it will be on account of their exertions; if he escapes, it will bein spite of their exertions. It's heads I win and tails you lose.Whatever they do, they will have followers. 'Un sot trouve toujoursun plus sot qui l'admire.'"
"What on earth is this?" I cried, for at this moment there came thepattering of many steps in the hall and on the stairs, accompanied byaudible expressions of disgust upon the part of our landlady.
"It's the Baker Street division of the detective police force," saidmy companion, gravely; and as he spoke there rushed into the roomhalf a dozen of the dirtiest and most ragged street Arabs that ever Iclapped eyes on.
"'Tention!" cried Holmes, in a sharp tone, and the six dirty littlescoundrels stood in a line like so many disreputable statuettes. "Infuture you shall send up Wiggins alone to report, and the rest of youmust wait in the street. Have you found it, Wiggins?"
"No, sir, we hain't," said one of the youths.
"I hardly expected you would. You must keep on until you do. Here areyour wages." He handed each of them a shilling. "Now, off you go, andcome back with a better report next time."
He waved his hand, and they scampered away downstairs like so manyrats, and we heard their shrill voices next moment in the street.
"There's more work to be got out of one of those little beggars thanout of a dozen of the force," Holmes remarked. "The mere sight of anofficial-looking person seals men's lips. These youngsters, however,go everywhere and hear everything. They are as sharp as needles, too;all they want is organisation."
"Is it on this Brixton case that you are employing them?" I asked.
"Yes; there is a point which I wish to ascertain. It is merely amatter of time. Hullo! we are going to hear some news now with avengeance! Here is Gregson coming down the road with beatitudewritten upon every feature of his face. Bound for us, I know. Yes, heis stopping. There he is!"
There was a violent peal at the bell, and in a few seconds thefair-haired detective came up the stairs, three steps at a time, andburst into our sitting-room.
"My dear fellow," he cried, wringing Holmes' unresponsive hand,"congratulate me! I have made the whole thing as clear as day."
A shade of anxiety seemed to me to cross my companion's expressiveface.
"Do you mean that you are on the right track?" he asked.
"The right track! Why, sir, we have the man under lock and key."
"And his name is?"
"Arthur Charpentier, sub-lieutenant in Her Majesty's navy," criedGregson, pompously, rubbing his fat hands and inflating his chest.
Sherlock Holmes gave a sigh of relief, and relaxed into a smile.
"Take a seat, and try one of these cigars," he said. "We are anxiousto know how you managed it. Will you have some whiskey and water?"
"I don't mind if I do," the detective answered. "The tremendousexertions which I have gone through during the last day or two haveworn me out. Not so much bodily exertion, you understand, as thestrain upon the mind. You will appreciate that, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,for we are both brain-workers."
"You do me too much honour," said Holmes, gravely. "Let us hear howyou arrived at this most gratifying result."
The detective seated himself in the arm-chair, and puffedcomplacently at his cigar. Then suddenly he slapped his thigh in aparoxysm of amusement.
"The fun of it is," he cried, "that that fool Lestrade, who thinkshimself so smart, has gone off upon the wrong track altogether. He isafter the secretary Stangerson, who had no more to do with the crimethan the babe unborn. I have no doubt that he has caught him by thistime."
The idea tickled Gregson so much that he laughed until he choked.
"And how did you get your clue?"
"Ah, I'll tell you all about it. Of course, Doctor Watson, this isstrictly between ourselves. The first difficulty which we had tocontend with was the finding of this American's antecedents. Somepeople would have waited until their advertisements were answered, oruntil parties came forward and volunteered information. That is notTobias Gregson's way of going to work. You remember the hat besidethe dead man?"
"Yes," said Holmes; "by John Underwood and Sons, 129, CamberwellRoad."
Gregson looked quite crest-fallen.
"I had no idea that you noticed that," he said. "Have you beenthere?"
"No."
"Ha!" cried Gregson, in a relieved voice; "you should never neglect achance, however small it may seem."
"To a great mind, nothing is little," remarked Holmes, sententiously.
"Well, I went to Underwood, and asked him if he had sold a hat ofthat size and description. He looked over his books, and came on itat once. He had sent the hat to a Mr. Drebber, residing atCharpentier's Boarding Establishment, Torquay Terrace. Thus I got athis address."
"Smart--very smart!" murmured Sherlock Holmes.
"I next called upon Madame Charpentier," continued the detective. "Ifound her very pale and distressed. Her daughter was in the room,too--an uncommonly fine girl she is, too; she was looking red aboutthe eyes and her lips trembled as I spoke to her. That didn't escapemy notice. I began to smell a rat. You know the feeling, Mr. SherlockHolmes, when you come upon the right scent--a kind of thrill in yournerves. 'Have you heard of the mysterious death of your late boarderMr. Enoch J. Drebber, of Cleveland?' I asked.
"The mother nodded. She didn't seem able to get out a word. Thedaughter burst into tears. I felt more than ever that these peopleknew something of the matter.
"'At what o'clock did Mr. Drebber leave your house for the train?' Iasked.
"'At eight o'clock,' she said, gulping in her throat to keep down heragitation. 'His secretary, Mr. Stangerson, said that there were twotrains--one at 9.15 and one at 11. He was to catch the first.'
"'And was that the last which you saw of him?'
"A terrible change came over the woman's face as I asked thequestion. Her features turned perfectly livid. It was some secondsbefore she could get out the single word 'Yes'--and when it did comeit was in a husky unnatural tone.
"There was silence for a moment, and then the daughter spoke in acalm clear voice.
"'No good can ever come of falsehood, mother,' she said. 'Let us befrank with this gentleman. We did see Mr. Drebber again.'
"'God forgive you!' cried Madame Charpentier, throwing up her handsand sinking back in her chair. 'You have murdered your brother.'
"'Arthur would rather that we spoke the truth,' the girl answeredfirmly.
"'You had best tell me all about it now,' I said. 'Half-confidencesare worse than none. Besides, you do not know how much we know ofit.'
"'On your head be it, Alice!' cried her mother; and then, turning tome, 'I will tell you all, sir. Do not imagine that my agitation onbehalf of my son arises from any fear lest he should have had a handin this terrible affair. He is utterly innocent of it. My dread is,however, that in your eyes and in the eyes of others he may appear tobe compromised. That however is surely impossible. His highcharacter, his profession, his antecedents would all forbid it.'
"'Your best way is to make a clean breast of the facts,' I answered.'Depend upon it, if your son is innocent he will be none the worse.'
"'Perhaps, Alice, you had better leave us together,' she said, andher daughter withdrew. 'Now, sir,' she continued, 'I had no intentionof telling you all this, but since my poor daughter has disclosed itI have no alternative. Having once decided to speak, I will tell youall without omitting any particular.'
"'It is your wisest course,' said I.
"'Mr. Drebber has been with us nearly three weeks. He and hissecretary, Mr. Stangerson, had been travelling on the Continent. Inoticed a "Copenhagen" label upon each of their trunks, showing thatthat had been their last stopping place. Stangerson was a quietreserved man, but his employer, I am sorry to say, was far otherwise.He was coarse in his habits and brutish in his ways. The very nightof his arrival he became very much the worse for drink, and, indeed,after twelve o'clock in the day he could hardly ever be said to besober. His manners towards the maid-servants were disgustingly freeand familiar. Worst of all, he speedily assumed the same attitudetowards my daughter, Alice, and spoke to her more than once in a waywhich, fortunately, she is too innocent to understand. On oneoccasion he actually seized her in his arms and embraced her--anoutrage which caused his own secretary to reproach him for hisunmanly conduct.'
"'But why did you stand all this,' I asked. 'I suppose that you canget rid of your boarders when you wish.'
"Mrs. Charpentier blushed at my pertinent question. 'Would to Godthat I had given him notice on the very day that he came,' she said.'But it was a sore temptation. They were paying a pound a dayeach--fourteen pounds a week, and this is the slack season. I am awidow, and my boy in the Navy has cost me much. I grudged to lose themoney. I acted for the best. This last was too much, however, and Igave him notice to leave on account of it. That was the reason of hisgoing.'
"'Well?'
"'My heart grew light when I saw him drive away. My son is on leavejust now, but I did not tell him anything of all this, for his temperis violent, and he is passionately fond of his sister. When I closedthe door behind them a load seemed to be lifted from my mind. Alas,in less than an hour there was a ring at the bell, and I learned thatMr. Drebber had returned. He was much excited, and evidently theworse for drink. He forced his way into the room, where I was sittingwith my daughter, and made some incoherent remark about having missedhis train. He then turned to Alice, and before my very face, proposedto her that she should fly with him. "You are of age," he said, "andthere is no law to stop you. I have money enough and to spare. Nevermind the old girl here, but come along with me now straight away. Youshall live like a princess." Poor Alice was so frightened that sheshrunk away from him, but he caught her by the wrist and endeavouredto draw her towards the door. I screamed, and at that moment my sonArthur came into the room. What happened then I do not know. I heardoaths and the confused sounds of a scuffle. I was too terrified toraise my head. When I did look up I saw Arthur standing in thedoorway laughing, with a stick in his hand. "I don't think that finefellow will trouble us again," he said. "I will just go after him andsee what he does with himself." With those words he took his hat andstarted off down the street. The next morning we heard of Mr.Drebber's mysterious death.'
"This statement came from Mrs. Charpentier's lips with many gasps andpauses. At times she spoke so low that I could hardly catch thewords. I made shorthand notes of all that she said, however, so thatthere should be no possibility of a mistake."
"It's quite exciting," said Sherlock Holmes, with a yawn. "Whathappened next?"
"When Mrs. Charpentier paused," the detective continued, "I saw thatthe whole case hung upon one point. Fixing her with my eye in a waywhich I always found effective with women, I asked her at what hourher son returned.
"'I do not know,' she answered.
"'Not know?'
"'No; he has a latch-key, and he let himself in.'
"'After you went to bed?'
"'Yes.'
"'When did you go to bed?'
"'About eleven.'
"'So your son was gone at least two hours?'
"'Yes.'
"'Possibly four or five?'
"'Yes.'
"'What was he doing during that time?'
"'I do not know,' she answered, turning white to her very lips.
"Of course after that there was nothing more to be done. I found outwhere Lieutenant Charpentier was, took two officers with me, andarrested him. When I touched him on the shoulder and warned him tocome quietly with us, he answered us as bold as brass, 'I suppose youare arresting me for being concerned in the death of that scoundrelDrebber,' he said. We had said nothing to him about it, so that hisalluding to it had a most suspicious aspect."
"Very," said Holmes.
"He still carried the heavy stick which the mother described him ashaving with him when he followed Drebber. It was a stout oak cudgel."
"What is your theory, then?"
"Well, my theory is that he followed Drebber as far as the BrixtonRoad. When there, a fresh altercation arose between them, in thecourse of which Drebber received a blow from the stick, in the pit ofthe stomach, perhaps, which killed him without leaving any mark. Thenight was so wet that no one was about, so Charpentier dragged thebody of his victim into the empty house. As to the candle, and theblood, and the writing on the wall, and the ring, they may all be somany tricks to throw the police on to the wrong scent."
"Well done!" said Holmes in an encouraging voice. "Really, Gregson,you are getting along. We shall make something of you yet."
"I flatter myself that I have managed it rather neatly," thedetective answered proudly. "The young man volunteered a statement,in which he said that after following Drebber some time, the latterperceived him, and took a cab in order to get away from him. On hisway home he met an old shipmate, and took a long walk with him. Onbeing asked where this old shipmate lived, he was unable to give anysatisfactory reply. I think the whole case fits together uncommonlywell. What amuses me is to think of Lestrade, who had started offupon the wrong scent. I am afraid he won't make much of--Why, byJove, here's the very man himself!"
It was indeed Lestrade, who had ascended the stairs while we weretalking, and who now entered the room. The assurance and jauntinesswhich generally marked his demeanour and dress were, however,wanting. His face was disturbed and troubled, while his clothes weredisarranged and untidy. He had evidently come with the intention ofconsulting with Sherlock Holmes, for on perceiving his colleague heappeared to be embarrassed and put out. He stood in the centre of theroom, fumbling nervously with his hat and uncertain what to do. "Thisis a most extraordinary case," he said at last--"a mostincomprehensible affair."
"Ah, you find it so, Mr. Lestrade!" cried Gregson, triumphantly. "Ithought you would come to that conclusion. Have you managed to findthe Secretary, Mr. Joseph Stangerson?"
"The Secretary, Mr. Joseph Stangerson," said Lestrade gravely, "wasmurdered at Halliday's Private Hotel about six o'clock this morning."




     CHAPTER VII     Light In The Darkness

The intelligence with which Lestrade greeted us was so momentous andso unexpected, that we were all three fairly dumbfounded. Gregsonsprang out of his chair and upset the remainder of his whiskey andwater. I stared in silence at Sherlock Holmes, whose lips werecompressed and his brows drawn down over his eyes.
"Stangerson too!" he muttered. "The plot thickens."
"It was quite thick enough before," grumbled Lestrade, taking achair. "I seem to have dropped into a sort of council of war."
"Are you--are you sure of this piece of intelligence?" stammeredGregson.
"I have just come from his room," said Lestrade. "I was the first todiscover what had occurred."
"We have been hearing Gregson's view of the matter," Holmes observed."Would you mind letting us know what you have seen and done?"
"I have no objection," Lestrade answered, seating himself. "I freelyconfess that I was of the opinion that Stangerson was concerned inthe death of Drebber. This fresh development has shown me that I wascompletely mistaken. Full of the one idea, I set myself to find outwhat had become of the Secretary. They had been seen together atEuston Station about half-past eight on the evening of the third. Attwo in the morning Drebber had been found in the Brixton Road. Thequestion which confronted me was to find out how Stangerson had beenemployed between 8.30 and the time of the crime, and what had becomeof him afterwards. I telegraphed to Liverpool, giving a descriptionof the man, and warning them to keep a watch upon the American boats.I then set to work calling upon all the hotels and lodging-houses inthe vicinity of Euston. You see, I argued that if Drebber and hiscompanion had become separated, the natural course for the latterwould be to put up somewhere in the vicinity for the night, and thento hang about the station again next morning."
"They would be likely to agree on some meeting-place beforehand,"remarked Holmes.
"So it proved. I spent the whole of yesterday evening in makingenquiries entirely without avail. This morning I began very early,and at eight o'clock I reached Halliday's Private Hotel, in LittleGeorge Street. On my enquiry as to whether a Mr. Stangerson wasliving there, they at once answered me in the affirmative.
"'No doubt you are the gentleman whom he was expecting,' they said.'He has been waiting for a gentleman for two days.'
"'Where is he now?' I asked.
"'He is upstairs in bed. He wished to be called at nine.'
"'I will go up and see him at once,' I said.
"It seemed to me that my sudden appearance might shake his nerves andlead him to say something unguarded. The Boots volunteered to show methe room: it was on the second floor, and there was a small corridorleading up to it. The Boots pointed out the door to me, and was aboutto go downstairs again when I saw something that made me feelsickish, in spite of my twenty years' experience. From under the doorthere curled a little red ribbon of blood, which had meandered acrossthe passage and formed a little pool along the skirting at the otherside. I gave a cry, which brought the Boots back. He nearly faintedwhen he saw it. The door was locked on the inside, but we put ourshoulders to it, and knocked it in. The window of the room was open,and beside the window, all huddled up, lay the body of a man in hisnightdress. He was quite dead, and had been for some time, for hislimbs were rigid and cold. When we turned him over, the Bootsrecognized him at once as being the same gentleman who had engagedthe room under the name of Joseph Stangerson. The cause of death wasa deep stab in the left side, which must have penetrated the heart.And now comes the strangest part of the affair. What do you supposewas above the murdered man?"
I felt a creeping of the flesh, and a presentiment of coming horror,even before Sherlock Holmes answered.
"The word RACHE, written in letters of blood," he said.
"That was it," said Lestrade, in an awe-struck voice; and we were allsilent for a while.
There was something so methodical and so incomprehensible about thedeeds of this unknown assassin, that it imparted a fresh ghastlinessto his crimes. My nerves, which were steady enough on the field ofbattle tingled as I thought of it.
"The man was seen," continued Lestrade. "A milk boy, passing on hisway to the dairy, happened to walk down the lane which leads from themews at the back of the hotel. He noticed that a ladder, whichusually lay there, was raised against one of the windows of thesecond floor, which was wide open. After passing, he looked back andsaw a man descend the ladder. He came down so quietly and openly thatthe boy imagined him to be some carpenter or joiner at work in thehotel. He took no particular notice of him, beyond thinking in hisown mind that it was early for him to be at work. He has animpression that the man was tall, had a reddish face, and was dressedin a long, brownish coat. He must have stayed in the room some littletime after the murder, for we found blood-stained water in the basin,where he had washed his hands, and marks on the sheets where he haddeliberately wiped his knife."
I glanced at Holmes on hearing the description of the murderer, whichtallied so exactly with his own. There was, however, no trace ofexultation or satisfaction upon his face.
"Did you find nothing in the room which could furnish a clue to themurderer?" he asked.
"Nothing. Stangerson had Drebber's purse in his pocket, but it seemsthat this was usual, as he did all the paying. There was eighty oddpounds in it, but nothing had been taken. Whatever the motives ofthese extraordinary crimes, robbery is certainly not one of them.There were no papers or memoranda in the murdered man's pocket,except a single telegram, dated from Cleveland about a month ago, andcontaining the words, 'J. H. is in Europe.' There was no nameappended to this message."
"And there was nothing else?" Holmes asked.
"Nothing of any importance. The man's novel, with which he had readhimself to sleep was lying upon the bed, and his pipe was on a chairbeside him. There was a glass of water on the table, and on thewindow-sill a small chip ointment box containing a couple of pills."
Sherlock Holmes sprang from his chair with an exclamation of delight.
"The last link," he cried, exultantly. "My case is complete."
The two detectives stared at him in amazement.
"I have now in my hands," my companion said, confidently, "all thethreads which have formed such a tangle. There are, of course,details to be filled in, but I am as certain of all the main facts,from the time that Drebber parted from Stangerson at the station, upto the discovery of the body of the latter, as if I had seen themwith my own eyes. I will give you a proof of my knowledge. Could youlay your hand upon those pills?"
"I have them," said Lestrade, producing a small white box; "I tookthem and the purse and the telegram, intending to have them put in aplace of safety at the Police Station. It was the merest chance mytaking these pills, for I am bound to say that I do not attach anyimportance to them."
"Give them here," said Holmes. "Now, Doctor," turning to me, "arethose ordinary pills?"
They certainly were not. They were of a pearly grey colour, small,round, and almost transparent against the light. "From theirlightness and transparency, I should imagine that they are soluble inwater," I remarked.
"Precisely so," answered Holmes. "Now would you mind going down andfetching that poor little devil of a terrier which has been bad solong, and which the landlady wanted you to put out of its painyesterday."
I went downstairs and carried the dog upstair in my arms. It'slaboured breathing and glazing eye showed that it was not far fromits end. Indeed, its snow-white muzzle proclaimed that it had alreadyexceeded the usual term of canine existence. I placed it upon acushion on the rug.
"I will now cut one of these pills in two," said Holmes, and drawinghis penknife he suited the action to the word. "One half we returninto the box for future purposes. The other half I will place in thiswine glass, in which is a teaspoonful of water. You perceive that ourfriend, the Doctor, is right, and that it readily dissolves."
"This may be very interesting," said Lestrade, in the injured tone ofone who suspects that he is being laughed at, "I cannot see, however,what it has to do with the death of Mr. Joseph Stangerson."
"Patience, my friend, patience! You will find in time that it haseverything to do with it. I shall now add a little milk to make themixture palatable, and on presenting it to the dog we find that helaps it up readily enough."
As he spoke he turned the contents of the wine glass into a saucerand placed it in front of the terrier, who speedily licked it dry.Sherlock Holmes' earnest demeanour had so far convinced us that weall sat in silence, watching the animal intently, and expecting somestartling effect. None such appeared, however. The dog continued tolie stretched upon the cushion, breathing in a laboured way, butapparently neither the better nor the worse for its draught.
Holmes had taken out his watch, and as minute followed minute withoutresult, an expression of the utmost chagrin and disappointmentappeared upon his features. He gnawed his lip, drummed his fingersupon the table, and showed every other symptom of acute impatience.So great was his emotion, that I felt sincerely sorry for him, whilethe two detectives smiled derisively, by no means displeased at thischeck which he had met.
"It can't be a coincidence," he cried, at last springing from hischair and pacing wildly up and down the room; "it is impossible thatit should be a mere coincidence. The very pills which I suspected inthe case of Drebber are actually found after the death of Stangerson.And yet they are inert. What can it mean? Surely my whole chain ofreasoning cannot have been false. It is impossible! And yet thiswretched dog is none the worse. Ah, I have it! I have it!" With aperfect shriek of delight he rushed to the box, cut the other pill intwo, dissolved it, added milk, and presented it to the terrier. Theunfortunate creature's tongue seemed hardly to have been moistened init before it gave a convulsive shiver in every limb, and lay as rigidand lifeless as if it had been struck by lightning.
Sherlock Holmes drew a long breath, and wiped the perspiration fromhis forehead. "I should have more faith," he said; "I ought to knowby this time that when a fact appears to be opposed to a long trainof deductions, it invariably proves to be capable of bearing someother interpretation. Of the two pills in that box one was of themost deadly poison, and the other was entirely harmless. I ought tohave known that before ever I saw the box at all."
This last statement appeared to me to be so startling, that I couldhardly believe that he was in his sober senses. There was the deaddog, however, to prove that his conjecture had been correct. Itseemed to me that the mists in my own mind were gradually clearingaway, and I began to have a dim, vague perception of the truth.
"All this seems strange to you," continued Holmes, "because youfailed at the beginning of the inquiry to grasp the importance of thesingle real clue which was presented to you. I had the good fortuneto seize upon that, and everything which has occurred since then hasserved to confirm my original supposition, and, indeed, was thelogical sequence of it. Hence things which have perplexed you andmade the case more obscure, have served to enlighten me and tostrengthen my conclusions. It is a mistake to confound strangenesswith mystery. The most commonplace crime is often the most mysteriousbecause it presents no new or special features from which deductionsmay be drawn. This murder would have been infinitely more difficultto unravel had the body of the victim been simply found lying in theroadway without any of those outr and sensational accompanimentswhich have rendered it remarkable. These strange details, far frommaking the case more difficult, have really had the effect of makingit less so."
Mr. Gregson, who had listened to this address with considerableimpatience, could contain himself no longer. "Look here, Mr. SherlockHolmes," he said, "we are all ready to acknowledge that you are asmart man, and that you have your own methods of working. We wantsomething more than mere theory and preaching now, though. It is acase of taking the man. I have made my case out, and it seems I waswrong. Young Charpentier could not have been engaged in this secondaffair. Lestrade went after his man, Stangerson, and it appears thathe was wrong too. You have thrown out hints here, and hints there,and seem to know more than we do, but the time has come when we feelthat we have a right to ask you straight how much you do know of thebusiness. Can you name the man who did it?"
"I cannot help feeling that Gregson is right, sir," remarkedLestrade. "We have both tried, and we have both failed. You haveremarked more than once since I have been in the room that you hadall the evidence which you require. Surely you will not withhold itany longer."
"Any delay in arresting the assassin," I observed, "might give himtime to perpetrate some fresh atrocity."
Thus pressed by us all, Holmes showed signs of irresolution. Hecontinued to walk up and down the room with his head sunk on hischest and his brows drawn down, as was his habit when lost inthought.
"There will be no more murders," he said at last, stopping abruptlyand facing us. "You can put that consideration out of the question.You have asked me if I know the name of the assassin. I do. The mereknowing of his name is a small thing, however, compared with thepower of laying our hands upon him. This I expect very shortly to do.I have good hopes of managing it through my own arrangements; but itis a thing which needs delicate handling, for we have a shrewd anddesperate man to deal with, who is supported, as I have had occasionto prove, by another who is as clever as himself. As long as this manhas no idea that anyone can have a clue there is some chance ofsecuring him; but if he had the slightest suspicion, he would changehis name, and vanish in an instant among the four million inhabitantsof this great city. Without meaning to hurt either of your feelings,I am bound to say that I consider these men to be more than a matchfor the official force, and that is why I have not asked yourassistance. If I fail I shall, of course, incur all the blame due tothis omission; but that I am prepared for. At present I am ready topromise that the instant that I can communicate with you withoutendangering my own combinations, I shall do so."
Gregson and Lestrade seemed to be far from satisfied by thisassurance, or by the depreciating allusion to the detective police.The former had flushed up to the roots of his flaxen hair, while theother's beady eyes glistened with curiosity and resentment. Neitherof them had time to speak, however, before there was a tap at thedoor, and the spokesman of the street Arabs, young Wiggins,introduced his insignificant and unsavoury person.
"Please, sir," he said, touching his forelock, "I have the cabdownstairs."
"Good boy," said Holmes, blandly. "Why don't you introduce thispattern at Scotland Yard?" he continued, taking a pair of steelhandcuffs from a drawer. "See how beautifully the spring works. Theyfasten in an instant."
"The old pattern is good enough," remarked Lestrade, "if we can onlyfind the man to put them on."
"Very good, very good," said Holmes, smiling. "The cabman may as wellhelp me with my boxes. Just ask him to step up, Wiggins."
I was surprised to find my companion speaking as though he were aboutto set out on a journey, since he had not said anything to me aboutit. There was a small portmanteau in the room, and this he pulled outand began to strap. He was busily engaged at it when the cabmanentered the room.
"Just give me a help with this buckle, cabman," he said, kneelingover his task, and never turning his head.
The fellow came forward with a somewhat sullen, defiant air, and putdown his hands to assist. At that instant there was a sharp click,the jangling of metal, and Sherlock Holmes sprang to his feet again.
"Gentlemen," he cried, with flashing eyes, "let me introduce you toMr. Jefferson Hope, the murderer of Enoch Drebber and of JosephStangerson."
The whole thing occurred in a moment--so quickly that I had no timeto realize it. I have a vivid recollection of that instant, ofHolmes' triumphant expression and the ring of his voice, of thecabman's dazed, savage face, as he glared at the glitteringhandcuffs, which had appeared as if by magic upon his wrists. For asecond or two we might have been a group of statues. Then, with aninarticulate roar of fury, the prisoner wrenched himself free fromHolmes's grasp, and hurled himself through the window. Woodwork andglass gave way before him; but before he got quite through, Gregson,Lestrade, and Holmes sprang upon him like so many staghounds. He wasdragged back into the room, and then commenced a terrific conflict.So powerful and so fierce was he, that the four of us were shaken offagain and again. He appeared to have the convulsive strength of a manin an epileptic fit. His face and hands were terribly mangled by hispassage through the glass, but loss of blood had no effect indiminishing his resistance. It was not until Lestrade succeeded ingetting his hand inside his neckcloth and half-strangling him that wemade him realize that his struggles were of no avail; and even thenwe felt no security until we had pinioned his feet as well as hishands. That done, we rose to our feet breathless and panting.
"We have his cab," said Sherlock Holmes. "It will serve to take himto Scotland Yard. And now, gentlemen," he continued, with a pleasantsmile, "we have reached the end of our little mystery. You are verywelcome to put any questions that you like to me now, and there is nodanger that I will refuse to answer them."








                                 PART II
                      The Country of the Saints.




     CHAPTER I     On The Great Alkali Plain

In the central portion of the great North American Continent therelies an arid and repulsive desert, which for many a long year servedas a barrier against the advance of civilisation. From the SierraNevada to Nebraska, and from the Yellowstone River in the north tothe Colorado upon the south, is a region of desolation and silence.Nor is Nature always in one mood throughout this grim district. Itcomprises snow-capped and lofty mountains, and dark and gloomyvalleys. There are swift-flowing rivers which dash through jaggedcaons; and there are enormous plains, which in winter are white withsnow, and in summer are grey with the saline alkali dust. They allpreserve, however, the common characteristics of barrenness,inhospitality, and misery.
There are no inhabitants of this land of despair. A band of Pawneesor of Blackfeet may occasionally traverse it in order to reach otherhunting-grounds, but the hardiest of the braves are glad to losesight of those awesome plains, and to find themselves once more upontheir prairies. The coyote skulks among the scrub, the buzzard flapsheavily through the air, and the clumsy grizzly bear lumbers throughthe dark ravines, and picks up such sustenance as it can amongst therocks. These are the sole dwellers in the wilderness.
In the whole world there can be no more dreary view than that fromthe northern slope of the Sierra Blanco. As far as the eye can reachstretches the great flat plain-land, all dusted over with patches ofalkali, and intersected by clumps of the dwarfish chaparral bushes.On the extreme verge of the horizon lie a long chain of mountainpeaks, with their rugged summits flecked with snow. In this greatstretch of country there is no sign of life, nor of anythingappertaining to life. There is no bird in the steel-blue heaven, nomovement upon the dull, grey earth--above all, there is absolutesilence. Listen as one may, there is no shadow of a sound in all thatmighty wilderness; nothing but silence--complete and heart-subduingsilence.
It has been said there is nothing appertaining to life upon the broadplain. That is hardly true. Looking down from the Sierra Blanco, onesees a pathway traced out across the desert, which winds away and islost in the extreme distance. It is rutted with wheels and troddendown by the feet of many adventurers. Here and there there arescattered white objects which glisten in the sun, and stand outagainst the dull deposit of alkali. Approach, and examine them! Theyare bones: some large and coarse, others smaller and more delicate.The former have belonged to oxen, and the latter to men. For fifteenhundred miles one may trace this ghastly caravan route by thesescattered remains of those who had fallen by the wayside.
Looking down on this very scene, there stood upon the fourth of May,eighteen hundred and forty-seven, a solitary traveller. Hisappearance was such that he might have been the very genius or demonof the region. An observer would have found it difficult to saywhether he was nearer to forty or to sixty. His face was lean andhaggard, and the brown parchment-like skin was drawn tightly over theprojecting bones; his long, brown hair and beard were all flecked anddashed with white; his eyes were sunken in his head, and burned withan unnatural lustre; while the hand which grasped his rifle washardly more fleshy than that of a skeleton. As he stood, he leanedupon his weapon for support, and yet his tall figure and the massiveframework of his bones suggested a wiry and vigorous constitution.His gaunt face, however, and his clothes, which hung so baggily overhis shrivelled limbs, proclaimed what it was that gave him thatsenile and decrepit appearance. The man was dying--dying from hungerand from thirst.
He had toiled painfully down the ravine, and on to this littleelevation, in the vain hope of seeing some signs of water. Now thegreat salt plain stretched before his eyes, and the distant belt ofsavage mountains, without a sign anywhere of plant or tree, whichmight indicate the presence of moisture. In all that broad landscapethere was no gleam of hope. North, and east, and west he looked withwild questioning eyes, and then he realised that his wanderings hadcome to an end, and that there, on that barren crag, he was about todie. "Why not here, as well as in a feather bed, twenty years hence,"he muttered, as he seated himself in the shelter of a boulder.
Before sitting down, he had deposited upon the ground his uselessrifle, and also a large bundle tied up in a grey shawl, which he hadcarried slung over his right shoulder. It appeared to be somewhat tooheavy for his strength, for in lowering it, it came down on theground with some little violence. Instantly there broke from the greyparcel a little moaning cry, and from it there protruded a small,scared face, with very bright brown eyes, and two little speckled,dimpled fists.
"You've hurt me!" said a childish voice reproachfully.
"Have I though," the man answered penitently, "I didn't go for to doit." As he spoke he unwrapped the grey shawl and extricated a prettylittle girl of about five years of age, whose dainty shoes and smartpink frock with its little linen apron all bespoke a mother's care.The child was pale and wan, but her healthy arms and legs showed thatshe had suffered less than her companion.
"How is it now?" he answered anxiously, for she was still rubbing thetowsy golden curls which covered the back of her head.
"Kiss it and make it well," she said, with perfect gravity, shovingthe injured part up to him. "That's what mother used to do. Where'smother?"
"Mother's gone. I guess you'll see her before long."
"Gone, eh!" said the little girl. "Funny, she didn't say good-bye;she 'most always did if she was just goin' over to Auntie's for tea,and now she's been away three days. Say, it's awful dry, ain't it?Ain't there no water, nor nothing to eat?"
"No, there ain't nothing, dearie. You'll just need to be patientawhile, and then you'll be all right. Put your head up agin me likethat, and then you'll feel bullier. It ain't easy to talk when yourlips is like leather, but I guess I'd best let you know how the cardslie. What's that you've got?"
"Pretty things! fine things!" cried the little girl enthusiastically,holding up two glittering fragments of mica. "When we goes back tohome I'll give them to brother Bob."
"You'll see prettier things than them soon," said the manconfidently. "You just wait a bit. I was going to tell youthough--you remember when we left the river?"
"Oh, yes."
"Well, we reckoned we'd strike another river soon, d'ye see. Butthere was somethin' wrong; compasses, or map, or somethin', and itdidn't turn up. Water ran out. Just except a little drop for thelikes of you and--and--"
"And you couldn't wash yourself," interrupted his companion gravely,staring up at his grimy visage.
"No, nor drink. And Mr. Bender, he was the fust to go, and thenIndian Pete, and then Mrs. McGregor, and then Johnny Hones, and then,dearie, your mother."
"Then mother's a deader too," cried the little girl dropping her facein her pinafore and sobbing bitterly.
"Yes, they all went except you and me. Then I thought there was somechance of water in this direction, so I heaved you over my shoulderand we tramped it together. It don't seem as though we've improvedmatters. There's an almighty small chance for us now!"
"Do you mean that we are going to die too?" asked the child, checkingher sobs, and raising her tear-stained face.
"I guess that's about the size of it."
"Why didn't you say so before?" she said, laughing gleefully. "Yougave me such a fright. Why, of course, now as long as we die we'll bewith mother again."
"Yes, you will, dearie."
"And you too. I'll tell her how awful good you've been. I'll bet shemeets us at the door of Heaven with a big pitcher of water, and a lotof buckwheat cakes, hot, and toasted on both sides, like Bob and mewas fond of. How long will it be first?"
"I don't know--not very long." The man's eyes were fixed upon thenorthern horizon. In the blue vault of the heaven there had appearedthree little specks which increased in size every moment, so rapidlydid they approach. They speedily resolved themselves into three largebrown birds, which circled over the heads of the two wanderers, andthen settled upon some rocks which overlooked them. They werebuzzards, the vultures of the west, whose coming is the forerunner ofdeath.
"Cocks and hens," cried the little girl gleefully, pointing at theirill-omened forms, and clapping her hands to make them rise. "Say, didGod make this country?"
"Of course He did," said her companion, rather startled by thisunexpected question.
"He made the country down in Illinois, and He made the Missouri," thelittle girl continued. "I guess somebody else made the country inthese parts. It's not nearly so well done. They forgot the water andthe trees."
"What would ye think of offering up prayer?" the man askeddiffidently.
"It ain't night yet," she answered.
"It don't matter. It ain't quite regular, but He won't mind that, youbet. You say over them ones that you used to say every night in thewaggon when we was on the Plains."
"Why don't you say some yourself?" the child asked, with wonderingeyes.
"I disremember them," he answered. "I hain't said none since I washalf the height o' that gun. I guess it's never too late. You saythem out, and I'll stand by and come in on the choruses."
"Then you'll need to kneel down, and me too," she said, laying theshawl out for that purpose. "You've got to put your hands up likethis. It makes you feel kind o' good."
It was a strange sight had there been anything but the buzzards tosee it. Side by side on the narrow shawl knelt the two wanderers, thelittle prattling child and the reckless, hardened adventurer. Herchubby face, and his haggard, angular visage were both turned up tothe cloudless heaven in heartfelt entreaty to that dread being withwhom they were face to face, while the two voices--the one thin andclear, the other deep and harsh--united in the entreaty for mercy andforgiveness. The prayer finished, they resumed their seat in theshadow of the boulder until the child fell asleep, nestling upon thebroad breast of her protector. He watched over her slumber for sometime, but Nature proved to be too strong for him. For three days andthree nights he had allowed himself neither rest nor repose. Slowlythe eyelids drooped over the tired eyes, and the head sunk lower andlower upon the breast, until the man's grizzled beard was mixed withthe gold tresses of his companion, and both slept the same deep anddreamless slumber.
Had the wanderer remained awake for another half hour a strange sightwould have met his eyes. Far away on the extreme verge of the alkaliplain there rose up a little spray of dust, very slight at first, andhardly to be distinguished from the mists of the distance, butgradually growing higher and broader until it formed a solid,well-defined cloud. This cloud continued to increase in size until itbecame evident that it could only be raised by a great multitude ofmoving creatures. In more fertile spots the observer would have cometo the conclusion that one of those great herds of bisons which grazeupon the prairie land was approaching him. This was obviouslyimpossible in these arid wilds. As the whirl of dust drew nearer tothe solitary bluff upon which the two castaways were reposing, thecanvas-covered tilts of waggons and the figures of armed horsemenbegan to show up through the haze, and the apparition revealed itselfas being a great caravan upon its journey for the West. But what acaravan! When the head of it had reached the base of the mountains,the rear was not yet visible on the horizon. Right across theenormous plain stretched the straggling array, waggons and carts, menon horseback, and men on foot. Innumerable women who staggered alongunder burdens, and children who toddled beside the waggons or peepedout from under the white coverings. This was evidently no ordinaryparty of immigrants, but rather some nomad people who had beencompelled from stress of circumstances to seek themselves a newcountry. There rose through the clear air a confused clattering andrumbling from this great mass of humanity, with the creaking ofwheels and the neighing of horses. Loud as it was, it was notsufficient to rouse the two tired wayfarers above them.
At the head of the column there rode a score or more of graveironfaced men, clad in sombre homespun garments and armed withrifles. On reaching the base of the bluff they halted, and held ashort council among themselves.
"The wells are to the right, my brothers," said one, a hard-lipped,clean-shaven man with grizzly hair.
"To the right of the Sierra Blanco--so we shall reach the RioGrande," said another.
"Fear not for water," cried a third. "He who could draw it from therocks will not now abandon His own chosen people."
"Amen! Amen!" responded the whole party.
They were about to resume their journey when one of the youngest andkeenest-eyed uttered an exclamation and pointed up at the rugged cragabove them. From its summit there fluttered a little wisp of pink,showing up hard and bright against the grey rocks behind. At thesight there was a general reining up of horses and unslinging ofguns, while fresh horsemen came galloping up to reinforce thevanguard. The word "Redskins" was on every lip.
"There can't be any number of Injuns here," said the elderly man whoappeared to be in command. "We have passed the Pawnees, and there areno other tribes until we cross the great mountains."
"Shall I go forward and see, Brother Stangerson," asked one of theband.
"And I," "and I," cried a dozen voices.
"Leave your horses below and we will await you here," the Elderanswered. In a moment the young fellows had dismounted, fastenedtheir horses, and were ascending the precipitous slope which led upto the object which had excited their curiosity. They advancedrapidly and noiselessly, with the confidence and dexterity ofpractised scouts. The watchers from the plain below could see themflit from rock to rock until their figures stood out against theskyline. The young man who had first given the alarm was leadingthem. Suddenly his followers saw him throw up his hands, as thoughovercome with astonishment, and on joining him they were affected inthe same way by the sight which met their eyes.
On the little plateau which crowned the barren hill there stood asingle giant boulder, and against this boulder there lay a tall man,long-bearded and hard-featured, but of an excessive thinness. Hisplacid face and regular breathing showed that he was fast asleep.Beside him lay a little child, with her round white arms encirclinghis brown sinewy neck, and her golden haired head resting upon thebreast of his velveteen tunic. Her rosy lips were parted, showing theregular line of snow-white teeth within, and a playful smile playedover her infantile features. Her plump little white legs terminatingin white socks and neat shoes with shining buckles, offered a strangecontrast to the long shrivelled members of her companion. On theledge of rock above this strange couple there stood three solemnbuzzards, who, at the sight of the new comers uttered raucous screamsof disappointment and flapped sullenly away.
The cries of the foul birds awoke the two sleepers who stared aboutthem in bewilderment. The man staggered to his feet and looked downupon the plain which had been so desolate when sleep had overtakenhim, and which was now traversed by this enormous body of men and ofbeasts. His face assumed an expression of incredulity as he gazed,and he passed his boney hand over his eyes. "This is what they calldelirium, I guess," he muttered. The child stood beside him, holdingon to the skirt of his coat, and said nothing but looked all roundher with the wondering questioning gaze of childhood.
The rescuing party were speedily able to convince the two castawaysthat their appearance was no delusion. One of them seized the littlegirl, and hoisted her upon his shoulder, while two others supportedher gaunt companion, and assisted him towards the waggons.
"My name is John Ferrier," the wanderer explained; "me and thatlittle un are all that's left o' twenty-one people. The rest is alldead o' thirst and hunger away down in the south."
"Is she your child?" asked someone.
"I guess she is now," the other cried, defiantly; "she's mine 'causeI saved her. No man will take her from me. She's Lucy Ferrier fromthis day on. Who are you, though?" he continued, glancing withcuriosity at his stalwart, sunburned rescuers; "there seems to be apowerful lot of ye."
"Nigh upon ten thousand," said one of the young men; "we are thepersecuted children of God--the chosen of the Angel Merona."
"I never heard tell on him," said the wanderer. "He appears to havechosen a fair crowd of ye."
"Do not jest at that which is sacred," said the other sternly. "Weare of those who believe in those sacred writings, drawn in Egyptianletters on plates of beaten gold, which were handed unto the holyJoseph Smith at Palmyra. We have come from Nauvoo, in the State ofIllinois, where we had founded our temple. We have come to seek arefuge from the violent man and from the godless, even though it bethe heart of the desert."
The name of Nauvoo evidently recalled recollections to John Ferrier."I see," he said, "you are the Mormons."
"We are the Mormons," answered his companions with one voice.
"And where are you going?"
"We do not know. The hand of God is leading us under the person ofour Prophet. You must come before him. He shall say what is to bedone with you."
They had reached the base of the hill by this time, and weresurrounded by crowds of the pilgrims--pale-faced meek-looking women,strong laughing children, and anxious earnest-eyed men. Many were thecries of astonishment and of commiseration which arose from them whenthey perceived the youth of one of the strangers and the destitutionof the other. Their escort did not halt, however, but pushed on,followed by a great crowd of Mormons, until they reached a waggon,which was conspicuous for its great size and for the gaudiness andsmartness of its appearance. Six horses were yoked to it, whereas theothers were furnished with two, or, at most, four a-piece. Beside thedriver there sat a man who could not have been more than thirty yearsof age, but whose massive head and resolute expression marked him asa leader. He was reading a brown-backed volume, but as the crowdapproached he laid it aside, and listened attentively to an accountof the episode. Then he turned to the two castaways.
"If we take you with us," he said, in solemn words, "it can only beas believers in our own creed. We shall have no wolves in our fold.Better far that your bones should bleach in this wilderness than thatyou should prove to be that little speck of decay which in timecorrupts the whole fruit. Will you come with us on these terms?"
"Guess I'll come with you on any terms," said Ferrier, with suchemphasis that the grave Elders could not restrain a smile. The leaderalone retained his stern, impressive expression.
"Take him, Brother Stangerson," he said, "give him food and drink,and the child likewise. Let it be your task also to teach him ourholy creed. We have delayed long enough. Forward! On, on to Zion!"
"On, on to Zion!" cried the crowd of Mormons, and the words rippleddown the long caravan, passing from mouth to mouth until they diedaway in a dull murmur in the far distance. With a cracking of whipsand a creaking of wheels the great waggons got into motion, and soonthe whole caravan was winding along once more. The Elder to whosecare the two waifs had been committed, led them to his waggon, wherea meal was already awaiting them.
"You shall remain here," he said. "In a few days you will haverecovered from your fatigues. In the meantime, remember that now andforever you are of our religion. Brigham Young has said it, and hehas spoken with the voice of Joseph Smith, which is the voice ofGod."




     CHAPTER II     The Flower Of Utah

This is not the place to commemorate the trials and privationsendured by the immigrant Mormons before they came to their finalhaven. From the shores of the Mississippi to the western slopes ofthe Rocky Mountains they had struggled on with a constancy almostunparalleled in history. The savage man, and the savage beast,hunger, thirst, fatigue, and disease--every impediment which Naturecould place in the way--had all been overcome with Anglo-Saxontenacity. Yet the long journey and the accumulated terrors had shakenthe hearts of the stoutest among them. There was not one who did notsink upon his knees in heartfelt prayer when they saw the broadvalley of Utah bathed in the sunlight beneath them, and learned fromthe lips of their leader that this was the promised land, and thatthese virgin acres were to be theirs for evermore.
Young speedily proved himself to be a skilful administrator as wellas a resolute chief. Maps were drawn and charts prepared, in whichthe future city was sketched out. All around farms were apportionedand allotted in proportion to the standing of each individual. Thetradesman was put to his trade and the artisan to his calling. In thetown streets and squares sprang up, as if by magic. In the countrythere was draining and hedging, planting and clearing, until the nextsummer saw the whole country golden with the wheat crop. Everythingprospered in the strange settlement. Above all, the great templewhich they had erected in the centre of the city grew ever taller andlarger. From the first blush of dawn until the closing of thetwilight, the clatter of the hammer and the rasp of the saw was neverabsent from the monument which the immigrants erected to Him who hadled them safe through many dangers.
The two castaways, John Ferrier and the little girl who had sharedhis fortunes and had been adopted as his daughter, accompanied theMormons to the end of their great pilgrimage. Little Lucy Ferrier wasborne along pleasantly enough in Elder Stangerson's waggon, a retreatwhich she shared with the Mormon's three wives and with his son, aheadstrong forward boy of twelve. Having rallied, with the elasticityof childhood, from the shock caused by her mother's death, she soonbecame a pet with the women, and reconciled herself to this new lifein her moving canvas-covered home. In the meantime Ferrier havingrecovered from his privations, distinguished himself as a usefulguide and an indefatigable hunter. So rapidly did he gain the esteemof his new companions, that when they reached the end of theirwanderings, it was unanimously agreed that he should be provided withas large and as fertile a tract of land as any of the settlers, withthe exception of Young himself, and of Stangerson, Kemball, Johnston,and Drebber, who were the four principal Elders.
On the farm thus acquired John Ferrier built himself a substantiallog-house, which received so many additions in succeeding years thatit grew into a roomy villa. He was a man of a practical turn of mind,keen in his dealings and skilful with his hands. His ironconstitution enabled him to work morning and evening at improving andtilling his lands. Hence it came about that his farm and all thatbelonged to him prospered exceedingly. In three years he was betteroff than his neighbours, in six he was well-to-do, in nine he wasrich, and in twelve there were not half a dozen men in the whole ofSalt Lake City who could compare with him. From the great inland seato the distant Wahsatch Mountains there was no name better known thanthat of John Ferrier.
There was one way and only one in which he offended thesusceptibilities of his co-religionists. No argument or persuasioncould ever induce him to set up a female establishment after themanner of his companions. He never gave reasons for this persistentrefusal, but contented himself by resolutely and inflexibly adheringto his determination. There were some who accused him of lukewarmnessin his adopted religion, and others who put it down to greed ofwealth and reluctance to incur expense. Others, again, spoke of someearly love affair, and of a fair-haired girl who had pined away onthe shores of the Atlantic. Whatever the reason, Ferrier remainedstrictly celibate. In every other respect he conformed to thereligion of the young settlement, and gained the name of being anorthodox and straight-walking man.
Lucy Ferrier grew up within the log-house, and assisted her adoptedfather in all his undertakings. The keen air of the mountains and thebalsamic odour of the pine trees took the place of nurse and motherto the young girl. As year succeeded to year she grew taller andstronger, her cheek more rudy, and her step more elastic. Many awayfarer upon the high road which ran by Ferrier's farm feltlong-forgotten thoughts revive in their mind as they watched herlithe girlish figure tripping through the wheatfields, or met hermounted upon her father's mustang, and managing it with all the easeand grace of a true child of the West. So the bud blossomed into aflower, and the year which saw her father the richest of the farmersleft her as fair a specimen of American girlhood as could be found inthe whole Pacific slope.
It was not the father, however, who first discovered that the childhad developed into the woman. It seldom is in such cases. Thatmysterious change is too subtle and too gradual to be measured bydates. Least of all does the maiden herself know it until the tone ofa voice or the touch of a hand sets her heart thrilling within her,and she learns, with a mixture of pride and of fear, that a new and alarger nature has awoken within her. There are few who cannot recallthat day and remember the one little incident which heralded the dawnof a new life. In the case of Lucy Ferrier the occasion was seriousenough in itself, apart from its future influence on her destiny andthat of many besides.
It was a warm June morning, and the Latter Day Saints were as busy asthe bees whose hive they have chosen for their emblem. In the fieldsand in the streets rose the same hum of human industry. Down thedusty high roads defiled long streams of heavily-laden mules, allheading to the west, for the gold fever had broken out in California,and the Overland Route lay through the City of the Elect. There, too,were droves of sheep and bullocks coming in from the outlying pasturelands, and trains of tired immigrants, men and horses equally wearyof their interminable journey. Through all this motley assemblage,threading her way with the skill of an accomplished rider, theregalloped Lucy Ferrier, her fair face flushed with the exercise andher long chestnut hair floating out behind her. She had a commissionfrom her father in the City, and was dashing in as she had done manya time before, with all the fearlessness of youth, thinking only ofher task and how it was to be performed. The travel-stainedadventurers gazed after her in astonishment, and even the unemotionalIndians, journeying in with their pelties, relaxed their accustomedstoicism as they marvelled at the beauty of the pale-faced maiden.
She had reached the outskirts of the city when she found the roadblocked by a great drove of cattle, driven by a half-dozenwild-looking herdsmen from the plains. In her impatience sheendeavoured to pass this obstacle by pushing her horse into whatappeared to be a gap. Scarcely had she got fairly into it, however,before the beasts closed in behind her, and she found herselfcompletely imbedded in the moving stream of fierce-eyed, long-hornedbullocks. Accustomed as she was to deal with cattle, she was notalarmed at her situation, but took advantage of every opportunity tourge her horse on in the hopes of pushing her way through thecavalcade. Unfortunately the horns of one of the creatures, either byaccident or design, came in violent contact with the flank of themustang, and excited it to madness. In an instant it reared up uponits hind legs with a snort of rage, and pranced and tossed in a waythat would have unseated any but a most skilful rider. The situationwas full of peril. Every plunge of the excited horse brought itagainst the horns again, and goaded it to fresh madness. It was allthat the girl could do to keep herself in the saddle, yet a slipwould mean a terrible death under the hoofs of the unwieldy andterrified animals. Unaccustomed to sudden emergencies, her head beganto swim, and her grip upon the bridle to relax. Choked by the risingcloud of dust and by the steam from the struggling creatures, shemight have abandoned her efforts in despair, but for a kindly voiceat her elbow which assured her of assistance. At the same moment asinewy brown hand caught the frightened horse by the curb, andforcing a way through the drove, soon brought her to the outskirts.
"You're not hurt, I hope, miss," said her preserver, respectfully.
She looked up at his dark, fierce face, and laughed saucily. "I'mawful frightened," she said, naively; "whoever would have thoughtthat Poncho would have been so scared by a lot of cows?"
"Thank God you kept your seat," the other said earnestly. He was atall, savage-looking young fellow, mounted on a powerful roan horse,and clad in the rough dress of a hunter, with a long rifle slung overhis shoulders. "I guess you are the daughter of John Ferrier," heremarked, "I saw you ride down from his house. When you see him, askhim if he remembers the Jefferson Hopes of St. Louis. If he's thesame Ferrier, my father and he were pretty thick."
"Hadn't you better come and ask yourself?" she asked, demurely.
The young fellow seemed pleased at the suggestion, and his dark eyessparkled with pleasure. "I'll do so," he said, "we've been in themountains for two months, and are not over and above in visitingcondition. He must take us as he finds us."
"He has a good deal to thank you for, and so have I," she answered,"he's awful fond of me. If those cows had jumped on me he'd havenever got over it."
"Neither would I," said her companion.
"You! Well, I don't see that it would make much matter to you,anyhow. You ain't even a friend of ours."
The young hunter's dark face grew so gloomy over this remark thatLucy Ferrier laughed aloud.
"There, I didn't mean that," she said; "of course, you are a friendnow. You must come and see us. Now I must push along, or father won'ttrust me with his business any more. Good-bye!"
"Good-bye," he answered, raising his broad sombrero, and bending overher little hand. She wheeled her mustang round, gave it a cut withher riding-whip, and darted away down the broad road in a rollingcloud of dust.
Young Jefferson Hope rode on with his companions, gloomy andtaciturn. He and they had been among the Nevada Mountains prospectingfor silver, and were returning to Salt Lake City in the hope ofraising capital enough to work some lodes which they had discovered.He had been as keen as any of them upon the business until thissudden incident had drawn his thoughts into another channel. Thesight of the fair young girl, as frank and wholesome as the Sierrabreezes, had stirred his volcanic, untamed heart to its very depths.When she had vanished from his sight, he realized that a crisis hadcome in his life, and that neither silver speculations nor any otherquestions could ever be of such importance to him as this new andall-absorbing one. The love which had sprung up in his heart was notthe sudden, changeable fancy of a boy, but rather the wild, fiercepassion of a man of strong will and imperious temper. He had beenaccustomed to succeed in all that he undertook. He swore in his heartthat he would not fail in this if human effort and human perseverancecould render him successful.
He called on John Ferrier that night, and many times again, until hisface was a familiar one at the farm-house. John, cooped up in thevalley, and absorbed in his work, had had little chance of learningthe news of the outside world during the last twelve years. All thisJefferson Hope was able to tell him, and in a style which interestedLucy as well as her father. He had been a pioneer in California, andcould narrate many a strange tale of fortunes made and fortunes lostin those wild, halcyon days. He had been a scout too, and a trapper,a silver explorer, and a ranchman. Wherever stirring adventures wereto be had, Jefferson Hope had been there in search of them. He soonbecame a favourite with the old farmer, who spoke eloquently of hisvirtues. On such occasions, Lucy was silent, but her blushing cheekand her bright, happy eyes, showed only too clearly that her youngheart was no longer her own. Her honest father may not have observedthese symptoms, but they were assuredly not thrown away upon the manwho had won her affections.
It was a summer evening when he came galloping down the road andpulled up at the gate. She was at the doorway, and came down to meethim. He threw the bridle over the fence and strode up the pathway.
"I am off, Lucy," he said, taking her two hands in his, and gazingtenderly down into her face; "I won't ask you to come with me now,but will you be ready to come when I am here again?"
"And when will that be?" she asked, blushing and laughing.
"A couple of months at the outside. I will come and claim you then,my darling. There's no one who can stand between us."
"And how about father?" she asked.
"He has given his consent, provided we get these mines working allright. I have no fear on that head."
"Oh, well; of course, if you and father have arranged it all, there'sno more to be said," she whispered, with her cheek against his broadbreast.
"Thank God!" he said, hoarsely, stooping and kissing her. "It issettled, then. The longer I stay, the harder it will be to go. Theyare waiting for me at the caon. Good-bye, my own darling--good-bye.In two months you shall see me."
He tore himself from her as he spoke, and, flinging himself upon hishorse, galloped furiously away, never even looking round, as thoughafraid that his resolution might fail him if he took one glance atwhat he was leaving. She stood at the gate, gazing after him until hevanished from her sight. Then she walked back into the house, thehappiest girl in all Utah.




     CHAPTER III     John Ferrier Talks With The Prophet

Three weeks had passed since Jefferson Hope and his comrades haddeparted from Salt Lake City. John Ferrier's heart was sore withinhim when he thought of the young man's return, and of the impendingloss of his adopted child. Yet her bright and happy face reconciledhim to the arrangement more than any argument could have done. He hadalways determined, deep down in his resolute heart, that nothingwould ever induce him to allow his daughter to wed a Mormon. Such amarriage he regarded as no marriage at all, but as a shame and adisgrace. Whatever he might think of the Mormon doctrines, upon thatone point he was inflexible. He had to seal his mouth on the subject,however, for to express an unorthodox opinion was a dangerous matterin those days in the Land of the Saints.
Yes, a dangerous matter--so dangerous that even the most saintlydared only whisper their religious opinions with bated breath, lestsomething which fell from their lips might be misconstrued, and bringdown a swift retribution upon them. The victims of persecution hadnow turned persecutors on their own account, and persecutors of themost terrible description. Not the Inquisition of Seville, nor theGerman Vehmgericht, nor the Secret Societies of Italy, were ever ableto put a more formidable machinery in motion than that which cast acloud over the State of Utah.
Its invisibility, and the mystery which was attached to it, made thisorganization doubly terrible. It appeared to be omniscient andomnipotent, and yet was neither seen nor heard. The man who held outagainst the Church vanished away, and none knew whither he had goneor what had befallen him. His wife and his children awaited him athome, but no father ever returned to tell them how he had fared atthe hands of his secret judges. A rash word or a hasty act wasfollowed by annihilation, and yet none knew what the nature might beof this terrible power which was suspended over them. No wonder thatmen went about in fear and trembling, and that even in the heart ofthe wilderness they dared not whisper the doubts which oppressedthem.
At first this vague and terrible power was exercised only upon therecalcitrants who, having embraced the Mormon faith, wishedafterwards to pervert or to abandon it. Soon, however, it took awider range. The supply of adult women was running short, andpolygamy without a female population on which to draw was a barrendoctrine indeed. Strange rumours began to be bandied about--rumoursof murdered immigrants and rifled camps in regions where Indians hadnever been seen. Fresh women appeared in the harems of theElders--women who pined and wept, and bore upon their faces thetraces of an unextinguishable horror. Belated wanderers upon themountains spoke of gangs of armed men, masked, stealthy, andnoiseless, who flitted by them in the darkness. These tales andrumours took substance and shape, and were corroborated andre-corroborated, until they resolved themselves into a definite name.To this day, in the lonely ranches of the West, the name of theDanite Band, or the Avenging Angels, is a sinister and an ill-omenedone.
Fuller knowledge of the organization which produced such terribleresults served to increase rather than to lessen the horror which itinspired in the minds of men. None knew who belonged to this ruthlesssociety. The names of the participators in the deeds of blood andviolence done under the name of religion were kept profoundly secret.The very friend to whom you communicated your misgivings as to theProphet and his mission, might be one of those who would come forthat night with fire and sword to exact a terrible reparation. Henceevery man feared his neighbour, and none spoke of the things whichwere nearest his heart.
One fine morning, John Ferrier was about to set out to hiswheatfields, when he heard the click of the latch, and, lookingthrough the window, saw a stout, sandy-haired, middle-aged man comingup the pathway. His heart leapt to his mouth, for this was none otherthan the great Brigham Young himself. Full of trepidation--for heknew that such a visit boded him little good--Ferrier ran to the doorto greet the Mormon chief. The latter, however, received hissalutations coldly, and followed him with a stern face into thesitting-room.
"Brother Ferrier," he said, taking a seat, and eyeing the farmerkeenly from under his light-coloured eyelashes, "the true believershave been good friends to you. We picked you up when you werestarving in the desert, we shared our food with you, led you safe tothe Chosen Valley, gave you a goodly share of land, and allowed youto wax rich under our protection. Is not this so?"
"It is so," answered John Ferrier.
"In return for all this we asked but one condition: that was, thatyou should embrace the true faith, and conform in every way to itsusages. This you promised to do, and this, if common report saystruly, you have neglected."
"And how have I neglected it?" asked Ferrier, throwing out his handsin expostulation. "Have I not given to the common fund? Have I notattended at the Temple? Have I not--?"
"Where are your wives?" asked Young, looking round him. "Call themin, that I may greet them."
"It is true that I have not married," Ferrier answered. "But womenwere few, and there were many who had better claims than I. I was nota lonely man: I had my daughter to attend to my wants."
"It is of that daughter that I would speak to you," said the leaderof the Mormons. "She has grown to be the flower of Utah, and hasfound favour in the eyes of many who are high in the land."
John Ferrier groaned internally.
"There are stories of her which I would fain disbelieve--stories thatshe is sealed to some Gentile. This must be the gossip of idletongues. What is the thirteenth rule in the code of the saintedJoseph Smith? 'Let every maiden of the true faith marry one of theelect; for if she wed a Gentile, she commits a grievous sin.' Thisbeing so, it is impossible that you, who profess the holy creed,should suffer your daughter to violate it."
John Ferrier made no answer, but he played nervously with hisriding-whip.
"Upon this one point your whole faith shall be tested--so it has beendecided in the Sacred Council of Four. The girl is young, and wewould not have her wed grey hairs, neither would we deprive her ofall choice. We Elders have many heifers*1, but our children must alsobe provided. Stangerson has a son, and Drebber has a son, and eitherof them would gladly welcome your daughter to their house. Let herchoose between them. They are young and rich, and of the true faith.What say you to that?"
Ferrier remained silent for some little time with his brows knitted.
"You will give us time," he said at last. "My daughter is veryyoung--she is scarce of an age to marry."
"She shall have a month to choose," said Young, rising from his seat."At the end of that time she shall give her answer."
He was passing through the door, when he turned, with flushed faceand flashing eyes. "It were better for you, John Ferrier," hethundered, "that you and she were now lying blanched skeletons uponthe Sierra Blanco, than that you should put your weak wills againstthe orders of the Holy Four!"
With a threatening gesture of his hand, he turned from the door, andFerrier heard his heavy step scrunching along the shingly path.
He was still sitting with his elbows upon his knees, considering howhe should broach the matter to his daughter when a soft hand was laidupon his, and looking up, he saw her standing beside him. One glanceat her pale, frightened face showed him that she had heard what hadpassed.
"I could not help it," she said, in answer to his look. "His voicerang through the house. Oh, father, father, what shall we do?"
"Don't you scare yourself," he answered, drawing her to him, andpassing his broad, rough hand caressingly over her chestnut hair."We'll fix it up somehow or another. You don't find your fancy kindo' lessening for this chap, do you?"
A sob and a squeeze of his hand was her only answer.
"No; of course not. I shouldn't care to hear you say you did. He's alikely lad, and he's a Christian, which is more than these folk here,in spite o' all their praying and preaching. There's a party startingfor Nevada to-morrow, and I'll manage to send him a message lettinghim know the hole we are in. If I know anything o' that young man,he'll be back here with a speed that would whip electro-telegraphs."
Lucy laughed through her tears at her father's description.
"When he comes, he will advise us for the best. But it is for youthat I am frightened, dear. One hears--one hears such dreadfulstories about those who oppose the Prophet: something terrible alwayshappens to them."
"But we haven't opposed him yet," her father answered. "It will betime to look out for squalls when we do. We have a clear month beforeus; at the end of that, I guess we had best shin out of Utah."
"Leave Utah!"
"That's about the size of it."
"But the farm?"
"We will raise as much as we can in money, and let the rest go. Totell the truth, Lucy, it isn't the first time I have thought of doingit. I don't care about knuckling under to any man, as these folk doto their darned prophet. I'm a free-born American, and it's all newto me. Guess I'm too old to learn. If he comes browsing about thisfarm, he might chance to run up against a charge of buckshottravelling in the opposite direction."
"But they won't let us leave," his daughter objected.
"Wait till Jefferson comes, and we'll soon manage that. In themeantime, don't you fret yourself, my dearie, and don't get your eyesswelled up, else he'll be walking into me when he sees you. There'snothing to be afeared about, and there's no danger at all."
John Ferrier uttered these consoling remarks in a very confidenttone, but she could not help observing that he paid unusual care tothe fastening of the doors that night, and that he carefully cleanedand loaded the rusty old shotgun which hung upon the wall of hisbedroom.
-----*1: Heber C Kemball, in one of his sermons, alludes to his hundredwives under this endearing epithet.



     CHAPTER IV     A Flight For Life

On the morning which followed his interview with the Mormon Prophet,John Ferrier went in to Salt Lake City, and having found hisacquaintance, who was bound for the Nevada Mountains, he entrustedhim with his message to Jefferson Hope. In it he told the young manof the imminent danger which threatened them, and how necessary itwas that he should return. Having done thus he felt easier in hismind, and returned home with a lighter heart.
As he approached his farm, he was surprised to see a horse hitched toeach of the posts of the gate. Still more surprised was he onentering to find two young men in possession of his sitting-room.One, with a long pale face, was leaning back in the rocking-chair,with his feet cocked up upon the stove. The other, a bull-neckedyouth with coarse bloated features, was standing in front of thewindow with his hands in his pocket, whistling a popular hymn. Bothof them nodded to Ferrier as he entered, and the one in therocking-chair commenced the conversation.
"Maybe you don't know us," he said. "This here is the son of ElderDrebber, and I'm Joseph Stangerson, who travelled with you in thedesert when the Lord stretched out His hand and gathered you into thetrue fold."
"As He will all the nations in His own good time," said the other ina nasal voice; "He grindeth slowly but exceeding small."
John Ferrier bowed coldly. He had guessed who his visitors were.
"We have come," continued Stangerson, "at the advice of our fathersto solicit the hand of your daughter for whichever of us may seemgood to you and to her. As I have but four wives and Brother Drebberhere has seven, it appears to me that my claim is the stronger one."
"Nay, nay, Brother Stangerson," cried the other; "the question is nothow many wives we have, but how many we can keep. My father has nowgiven over his mills to me, and I am the richer man."
"But my prospects are better," said the other, warmly. "When the Lordremoves my father, I shall have his tanning yard and his leatherfactory. Then I am your elder, and am higher in the Church."
"It will be for the maiden to decide," rejoined young Drebber,smirking at his own reflection in the glass. "We will leave it all toher decision."
During this dialogue, John Ferrier had stood fuming in the doorway,hardly able to keep his riding-whip from the backs of his twovisitors.
"Look here," he said at last, striding up to them, "when my daughtersummons you, you can come, but until then I don't want to see yourfaces again."
The two young Mormons stared at him in amazement. In their eyes thiscompetition between them for the maiden's hand was the highest ofhonours both to her and her father.
"There are two ways out of the room," cried Ferrier; "there is thedoor, and there is the window. Which do you care to use?"
His brown face looked so savage, and his gaunt hands so threatening,that his visitors sprang to their feet and beat a hurried retreat.The old farmer followed them to the door.
"Let me know when you have settled which it is to be," he said,sardonically.
"You shall smart for this!" Stangerson cried, white with rage. "Youhave defied the Prophet and the Council of Four. You shall rue it tothe end of your days."
"The hand of the Lord shall be heavy upon you," cried young Drebber;"He will arise and smite you!"
"Then I'll start the smiting," exclaimed Ferrier furiously, and wouldhave rushed upstairs for his gun had not Lucy seized him by the armand restrained him. Before he could escape from her, the clatter ofhorses' hoofs told him that they were beyond his reach.
"The young canting rascals!" he exclaimed, wiping the perspirationfrom his forehead; "I would sooner see you in your grave, my girl,than the wife of either of them."
"And so should I, father," she answered, with spirit; "but Jeffersonwill soon be here."
"Yes. It will not be long before he comes. The sooner the better, forwe do not know what their next move may be."
It was, indeed, high time that someone capable of giving advice andhelp should come to the aid of the sturdy old farmer and his adopteddaughter. In the whole history of the settlement there had never beensuch a case of rank disobedience to the authority of the Elders. Ifminor errors were punished so sternly, what would be the fate of thisarch rebel. Ferrier knew that his wealth and position would be of noavail to him. Others as well known and as rich as himself had beenspirited away before now, and their goods given over to the Church.He was a brave man, but he trembled at the vague, shadowy terrorswhich hung over him. Any known danger he could face with a firm lip,but this suspense was unnerving. He concealed his fears from hisdaughter, however, and affected to make light of the whole matter,though she, with the keen eye of love, saw plainly that he was ill atease.
He expected that he would receive some message or remonstrance fromYoung as to his conduct, and he was not mistaken, though it came inan unlooked-for manner. Upon rising next morning he found, to hissurprise, a small square of paper pinned on to the coverlet of hisbed just over his chest. On it was printed, in bold stragglingletters:--
"Twenty-nine days are given you for amendment, and then--"
The dash was more fear-inspiring than any threat could have been. Howthis warning came into his room puzzled John Ferrier sorely, for hisservants slept in an outhouse, and the doors and windows had all beensecured. He crumpled the paper up and said nothing to his daughter,but the incident struck a chill into his heart. The twenty-nine dayswere evidently the balance of the month which Young had promised.What strength or courage could avail against an enemy armed with suchmysterious powers? The hand which fastened that pin might have struckhim to the heart, and he could never have known who had slain him.
Still more shaken was he next morning. They had sat down to theirbreakfast when Lucy with a cry of surprise pointed upwards. In thecentre of the ceiling was scrawled, with a burned stick apparently,the number 28. To his daughter it was unintelligible, and he did notenlighten her. That night he sat up with his gun and kept watch andward. He saw and he heard nothing, and yet in the morning a great 27had been painted upon the outside of his door.
Thus day followed day; and as sure as morning came he found that hisunseen enemies had kept their register, and had marked up in someconspicuous position how many days were still left to him out of themonth of grace. Sometimes the fatal numbers appeared upon the walls,sometimes upon the floors, occasionally they were on small placardsstuck upon the garden gate or the railings. With all his vigilanceJohn Ferrier could not discover whence these daily warningsproceeded. A horror which was almost superstitious came upon him atthe sight of them. He became haggard and restless, and his eyes hadthe troubled look of some hunted creature. He had but one hope inlife now, and that was for the arrival of the young hunter fromNevada.
Twenty had changed to fifteen and fifteen to ten, but there was nonews of the absentee. One by one the numbers dwindled down, and stillthere came no sign of him. Whenever a horseman clattered down theroad, or a driver shouted at his team, the old farmer hurried to thegate thinking that help had arrived at last. At last, when he sawfive give way to four and that again to three, he lost heart, andabandoned all hope of escape. Single-handed, and with his limitedknowledge of the mountains which surrounded the settlement, he knewthat he was powerless. The more-frequented roads were strictlywatched and guarded, and none could pass along them without an orderfrom the Council. Turn which way he would, there appeared to be noavoiding the blow which hung over him. Yet the old man never waveredin his resolution to part with life itself before he consented towhat he regarded as his daughter's dishonour.
He was sitting alone one evening pondering deeply over his troubles,and searching vainly for some way out of them. That morning had shownthe figure 2 upon the wall of his house, and the next day would bethe last of the allotted time. What was to happen then? All manner ofvague and terrible fancies filled his imagination. And hisdaughter--what was to become of her after he was gone? Was there noescape from the invisible network which was drawn all round them. Hesank his head upon the table and sobbed at the thought of his ownimpotence.
What was that? In the silence he heard a gentle scratchingsound--low, but very distinct in the quiet of the night. It came fromthe door of the house. Ferrier crept into the hall and listenedintently. There was a pause for a few moments, and then the lowinsidious sound was repeated. Someone was evidently tapping verygently upon one of the panels of the door. Was it some midnightassassin who had come to carry out the murderous orders of the secrettribunal? Or was it some agent who was marking up that the last dayof grace had arrived. John Ferrier felt that instant death would bebetter than the suspense which shook his nerves and chilled hisheart. Springing forward he drew the bolt and threw the door open.
Outside all was calm and quiet. The night was fine, and the starswere twinkling brightly overhead. The little front garden lay beforethe farmer's eyes bounded by the fence and gate, but neither therenor on the road was any human being to be seen. With a sigh ofrelief, Ferrier looked to right and to left, until happening toglance straight down at his own feet he saw to his astonishment a manlying flat upon his face upon the ground, with arms and legs allasprawl.
So unnerved was he at the sight that he leaned up against the wallwith his hand to his throat to stifle his inclination to call out.His first thought was that the prostrate figure was that of somewounded or dying man, but as he watched it he saw it writhe along theground and into the hall with the rapidity and noiselessness of aserpent. Once within the house the man sprang to his feet, closed thedoor, and revealed to the astonished farmer the fierce face andresolute expression of Jefferson Hope.
"Good God!" gasped John Ferrier. "How you scared me! Whatever madeyou come in like that."
"Give me food," the other said, hoarsely. "I have had no time forbite or sup for eight-and-forty hours." He flung himself upon thecold meat and bread which were still lying upon the table from hishost's supper, and devoured it voraciously. "Does Lucy bear up well?"he asked, when he had satisfied his hunger.
"Yes. She does not know the danger," her father answered.
"That is well. The house is watched on every side. That is why Icrawled my way up to it. They may be darned sharp, but they're notquite sharp enough to catch a Washoe hunter."
John Ferrier felt a different man now that he realized that he had adevoted ally. He seized the young man's leathery hand and wrung itcordially. "You're a man to be proud of," he said. "There are notmany who would come to share our danger and our troubles."
"You've hit it there, pard," the young hunter answered. "I have arespect for you, but if you were alone in this business I'd thinktwice before I put my head into such a hornet's nest. It's Lucy thatbrings me here, and before harm comes on her I guess there will beone less o' the Hope family in Utah."
"What are we to do?"
"To-morrow is your last day, and unless you act to-night you arelost. I have a mule and two horses waiting in the Eagle Ravine. Howmuch money have you?"
"Two thousand dollars in gold, and five in notes."
"That will do. I have as much more to add to it. We must push forCarson City through the mountains. You had best wake Lucy. It is aswell that the servants do not sleep in the house."
While Ferrier was absent, preparing his daughter for the approachingjourney, Jefferson Hope packed all the eatables that he could findinto a small parcel, and filled a stoneware jar with water, for heknew by experience that the mountain wells were few and far between.He had hardly completed his arrangements before the farmer returnedwith his daughter all dressed and ready for a start. The greetingbetween the lovers was warm, but brief, for minutes were precious,and there was much to be done.
"We must make our start at once," said Jefferson Hope, speaking in alow but resolute voice, like one who realizes the greatness of theperil, but has steeled his heart to meet it. "The front and backentrances are watched, but with caution we may get away through theside window and across the fields. Once on the road we are only twomiles from the Ravine where the horses are waiting. By daybreak weshould be half-way through the mountains."
"What if we are stopped," asked Ferrier.
Hope slapped the revolver butt which protruded from the front of histunic. "If they are too many for us we shall take two or three ofthem with us," he said with a sinister smile.
The lights inside the house had all been extinguished, and from thedarkened window Ferrier peered over the fields which had been hisown, and which he was now about to abandon for ever. He had longnerved himself to the sacrifice, however, and the thought of thehonour and happiness of his daughter outweighed any regret at hisruined fortunes. All looked so peaceful and happy, the rustling treesand the broad silent stretch of grain-land, that it was difficult torealize that the spirit of murder lurked through it all. Yet thewhite face and set expression of the young hunter showed that in hisapproach to the house he had seen enough to satisfy him upon thathead.
Ferrier carried the bag of gold and notes, Jefferson Hope had thescanty provisions and water, while Lucy had a small bundle containinga few of her more valued possessions. Opening the window very slowlyand carefully, they waited until a dark cloud had somewhat obscuredthe night, and then one by one passed through into the little garden.With bated breath and crouching figures they stumbled across it, andgained the shelter of the hedge, which they skirted until they cameto the gap which opened into the cornfields. They had just reachedthis point when the young man seized his two companions and draggedthem down into the shadow, where they lay silent and trembling.
It was as well that his prairie training had given Jefferson Hope theears of a lynx. He and his friends had hardly crouched down beforethe melancholy hooting of a mountain owl was heard within a few yardsof them, which was immediately answered by another hoot at a smalldistance. At the same moment a vague shadowy figure emerged from thegap for which they had been making, and uttered the plaintive signalcry again, on which a second man appeared out of the obscurity.
"To-morrow at midnight," said the first who appeared to be inauthority. "When the Whip-poor-Will calls three times."
"It is well," returned the other. "Shall I tell Brother Drebber?"
"Pass it on to him, and from him to the others. Nine to seven!"
"Seven to five!" repeated the other, and the two figures flitted awayin different directions. Their concluding words had evidently beensome form of sign and countersign. The instant that their footstepshad died away in the distance, Jefferson Hope sprang to his feet, andhelping his companions through the gap, led the way across the fieldsat the top of his speed, supporting and half-carrying the girl whenher strength appeared to fail her.
"Hurry on! hurry on!" he gasped from time to time. "We are throughthe line of sentinels. Everything depends on speed. Hurry on!"
Once on the high road they made rapid progress. Only once did theymeet anyone, and then they managed to slip into a field, and so avoidrecognition. Before reaching the town the hunter branched away into arugged and narrow footpath which led to the mountains. Two darkjagged peaks loomed above them through the darkness, and the defilewhich led between them was the Eagle Caon in which the horses wereawaiting them. With unerring instinct Jefferson Hope picked his wayamong the great boulders and along the bed of a dried-up watercourse,until he came to the retired corner, screened with rocks, where thefaithful animals had been picketed. The girl was placed upon themule, and old Ferrier upon one of the horses, with his money-bag,while Jefferson Hope led the other along the precipitous anddangerous path.
It was a bewildering route for anyone who was not accustomed to faceNature in her wildest moods. On the one side a great crag towered upa thousand feet or more, black, stern, and menacing, with longbasaltic columns upon its rugged surface like the ribs of somepetrified monster. On the other hand a wild chaos of boulders anddebris made all advance impossible. Between the two ran the irregulartrack, so narrow in places that they had to travel in Indian file,and so rough that only practised riders could have traversed it atall. Yet in spite of all dangers and difficulties, the hearts of thefugitives were light within them, for every step increased thedistance between them and the terrible despotism from which they wereflying.
They soon had a proof, however, that they were still within thejurisdiction of the Saints. They had reached the very wildest andmost desolate portion of the pass when the girl gave a startled cry,and pointed upwards. On a rock which overlooked the track, showingout dark and plain against the sky, there stood a solitary sentinel.He saw them as soon as they perceived him, and his military challengeof "Who goes there?" rang through the silent ravine.
"Travellers for Nevada," said Jefferson Hope, with his hand upon therifle which hung by his saddle.
They could see the lonely watcher fingering his gun, and peering downat them as if dissatisfied at their reply.
"By whose permission?" he asked.
"The Holy Four," answered Ferrier. His Mormon experiences had taughthim that that was the highest authority to which he could refer.
"Nine from seven," cried the sentinel.
"Seven from five," returned Jefferson Hope promptly, remembering thecountersign which he had heard in the garden.
"Pass, and the Lord go with you," said the voice from above. Beyondhis post the path broadened out, and the horses were able to breakinto a trot. Looking back, they could see the solitary watcherleaning upon his gun, and knew that they had passed the outlying postof the chosen people, and that freedom lay before them.




     CHAPTER V     The Avenging Angels

All night their course lay through intricate defiles and overirregular and rock-strewn paths. More than once they lost their way,but Hope's intimate knowledge of the mountains enabled them to regainthe track once more. When morning broke, a scene of marvellous thoughsavage beauty lay before them. In every direction the greatsnow-capped peaks hemmed them in, peeping over each other's shouldersto the far horizon. So steep were the rocky banks on either side ofthem, that the larch and the pine seemed to be suspended over theirheads, and to need only a gust of wind to come hurtling down uponthem. Nor was the fear entirely an illusion, for the barren valleywas thickly strewn with trees and boulders which had fallen in asimilar manner. Even as they passed, a great rock came thunderingdown with a hoarse rattle which woke the echoes in the silent gorges,and startled the weary horses into a gallop.
As the sun rose slowly above the eastern horizon, the caps of thegreat mountains lit up one after the other, like lamps at a festival,until they were all ruddy and glowing. The magnificent spectaclecheered the hearts of the three fugitives and gave them fresh energy.At a wild torrent which swept out of a ravine they called a halt andwatered their horses, while they partook of a hasty breakfast. Lucyand her father would fain have rested longer, but Jefferson Hope wasinexorable. "They will be upon our track by this time," he said."Everything depends upon our speed. Once safe in Carson we may restfor the remainder of our lives."
During the whole of that day they struggled on through the defiles,and by evening they calculated that they were more than thirty milesfrom their enemies. At night-time they chose the base of a beetlingcrag, where the rocks offered some protection from the chill wind,and there huddled together for warmth, they enjoyed a few hours'sleep. Before daybreak, however, they were up and on their way oncemore. They had seen no signs of any pursuers, and Jefferson Hopebegan to think that they were fairly out of the reach of the terribleorganization whose enmity they had incurred. He little knew how farthat iron grasp could reach, or how soon it was to close upon themand crush them.
About the middle of the second day of their flight their scanty storeof provisions began to run out. This gave the hunter littleuneasiness, however, for there was game to be had among themountains, and he had frequently before had to depend upon his riflefor the needs of life. Choosing a sheltered nook, he piled together afew dried branches and made a blazing fire, at which his companionsmight warm themselves, for they were now nearly five thousand feetabove the sea level, and the air was bitter and keen. Having tetheredthe horses, and bade Lucy adieu, he threw his gun over his shoulder,and set out in search of whatever chance might throw in his way.Looking back he saw the old man and the young girl crouching over theblazing fire, while the three animals stood motionless in theback-ground. Then the intervening rocks hid them from his view.
He walked for a couple of miles through one ravine after anotherwithout success, though from the marks upon the bark of the trees,and other indications, he judged that there were numerous bears inthe vicinity. At last, after two or three hours' fruitless search, hewas thinking of turning back in despair, when casting his eyesupwards he saw a sight which sent a thrill of pleasure through hisheart. On the edge of a jutting pinnacle, three or four hundred feetabove him, there stood a creature somewhat resembling a sheep inappearance, but armed with a pair of gigantic horns. Thebig-horn--for so it is called--was acting, probably, as a guardianover a flock which were invisible to the hunter; but fortunately itwas heading in the opposite direction, and had not perceived him.Lying on his face, he rested his rifle upon a rock, and took a longand steady aim before drawing the trigger. The animal sprang into theair, tottered for a moment upon the edge of the precipice, and thencame crashing down into the valley beneath.
The creature was too unwieldy to lift, so the hunter contentedhimself with cutting away one haunch and part of the flank. With thistrophy over his shoulder, he hastened to retrace his steps, for theevening was already drawing in. He had hardly started, however,before he realized the difficulty which faced him. In his eagernesshe had wandered far past the ravines which were known to him, and itwas no easy matter to pick out the path which he had taken. Thevalley in which he found himself divided and sub-divided into manygorges, which were so like each other that it was impossible todistinguish one from the other. He followed one for a mile or moreuntil he came to a mountain torrent which he was sure that he hadnever seen before. Convinced that he had taken the wrong turn, hetried another, but with the same result. Night was coming on rapidly,and it was almost dark before he at last found himself in a defilewhich was familiar to him. Even then it was no easy matter to keep tothe right track, for the moon had not yet risen, and the high cliffson either side made the obscurity more profound. Weighed down withhis burden, and weary from his exertions, he stumbled along, keepingup his heart by the reflection that every step brought him nearer toLucy, and that he carried with him enough to ensure them food for theremainder of their journey.
He had now come to the mouth of the very defile in which he had leftthem. Even in the darkness he could recognize the outline of thecliffs which bounded it. They must, he reflected, be awaiting himanxiously, for he had been absent nearly five hours. In the gladnessof his heart he put his hands to his mouth and made the glen re-echoto a loud halloo as a signal that he was coming. He paused andlistened for an answer. None came save his own cry, which clatteredup the dreary silent ravines, and was borne back to his ears incountless repetitions. Again he shouted, even louder than before, andagain no whisper came back from the friends whom he had left such ashort time ago. A vague, nameless dread came over him, and he hurriedonwards frantically, dropping the precious food in his agitation.
When he turned the corner, he came full in sight of the spot wherethe fire had been lit. There was still a glowing pile of wood ashesthere, but it had evidently not been tended since his departure. Thesame dead silence still reigned all round. With his fears all changedto convictions, he hurried on. There was no living creature near theremains of the fire: animals, man, maiden, all were gone. It was onlytoo clear that some sudden and terrible disaster had occurred duringhis absence--a disaster which had embraced them all, and yet had leftno traces behind it.
Bewildered and stunned by this blow, Jefferson Hope felt his headspin round, and had to lean upon his rifle to save himself fromfalling. He was essentially a man of action, however, and speedilyrecovered from his temporary impotence. Seizing a half-consumed pieceof wood from the smouldering fire, he blew it into a flame, andproceeded with its help to examine the little camp. The ground wasall stamped down by the feet of horses, showing that a large party ofmounted men had overtaken the fugitives, and the direction of theirtracks proved that they had afterwards turned back to Salt Lake City.Had they carried back both of his companions with them? JeffersonHope had almost persuaded himself that they must have done so, whenhis eye fell upon an object which made every nerve of his body tinglewithin him. A little way on one side of the camp was a low-lying heapof reddish soil, which had assuredly not been there before. There wasno mistaking it for anything but a newly-dug grave. As the younghunter approached it, he perceived that a stick had been planted onit, with a sheet of paper stuck in the cleft fork of it. Theinscription upon the paper was brief, but to the point:
                             JOHN FERRIER,                      Formerly of Salt Lake City,                        Died August 4th, 1860.                                   
The sturdy old man, whom he had left so short a time before, wasgone, then, and this was all his epitaph. Jefferson Hope lookedwildly round to see if there was a second grave, but there was nosign of one. Lucy had been carried back by their terrible pursuers tofulfil her original destiny, by becoming one of the harem of theElder's son. As the young fellow realized the certainty of her fate,and his own powerlessness to prevent it, he wished that he, too, waslying with the old farmer in his last silent resting-place.
Again, however, his active spirit shook off the lethargy whichsprings from despair. If there was nothing else left to him, he couldat least devote his life to revenge. With indomitable patience andperseverance, Jefferson Hope possessed also a power of sustainedvindictiveness, which he may have learned from the Indians amongstwhom he had lived. As he stood by the desolate fire, he felt that theonly one thing which could assuage his grief would be thorough andcomplete retribution, brought by his own hand upon his enemies. Hisstrong will and untiring energy should, he determined, be devoted tothat one end. With a grim, white face, he retraced his steps to wherehe had dropped the food, and having stirred up the smouldering fire,he cooked enough to last him for a few days. This he made up into abundle, and, tired as he was, he set himself to walk back through themountains upon the track of the avenging angels.
For five days he toiled footsore and weary through the defiles whichhe had already traversed on horseback. At night he flung himself downamong the rocks, and snatched a few hours of sleep; but beforedaybreak he was always well on his way. On the sixth day, he reachedthe Eagle Caon, from which they had commenced their ill-fatedflight. Thence he could look down upon the home of the saints. Wornand exhausted, he leaned upon his rifle and shook his gaunt handfiercely at the silent widespread city beneath him. As he looked atit, he observed that there were flags in some of the principalstreets, and other signs of festivity. He was still speculating as towhat this might mean when he heard the clatter of horse's hoofs, andsaw a mounted man riding towards him. As he approached, he recognizedhim as a Mormon named Cowper, to whom he had rendered services atdifferent times. He therefore accosted him when he got up to him,with the object of finding out what Lucy Ferrier's fate had been.
"I am Jefferson Hope," he said. "You remember me."
The Mormon looked at him with undisguised astonishment--indeed, itwas difficult to recognize in this tattered, unkempt wanderer, withghastly white face and fierce, wild eyes, the spruce young hunter offormer days. Having, however, at last, satisfied himself as to hisidentity, the man's surprise changed to consternation.
"You are mad to come here," he cried. "It is as much as my own lifeis worth to be seen talking with you. There is a warrant against youfrom the Holy Four for assisting the Ferriers away."
"I don't fear them, or their warrant," Hope said, earnestly. "Youmust know something of this matter, Cowper. I conjure you byeverything you hold dear to answer a few questions. We have alwaysbeen friends. For God's sake, don't refuse to answer me."
"What is it?" the Mormon asked uneasily. "Be quick. The very rockshave ears and the trees eyes."
"What has become of Lucy Ferrier?"
"She was married yesterday to young Drebber. Hold up, man, hold up,you have no life left in you."
"Don't mind me," said Hope faintly. He was white to the very lips,and had sunk down on the stone against which he had been leaning."Married, you say?"
"Married yesterday--that's what those flags are for on the EndowmentHouse. There was some words between young Drebber and youngStangerson as to which was to have her. They'd both been in the partythat followed them, and Stangerson had shot her father, which seemedto give him the best claim; but when they argued it out in council,Drebber's party was the stronger, so the Prophet gave her over tohim. No one won't have her very long though, for I saw death in herface yesterday. She is more like a ghost than a woman. Are you off,then?"
"Yes, I am off," said Jefferson Hope, who had risen from his seat.His face might have been chiselled out of marble, so hard and set wasits expression, while its eyes glowed with a baleful light.
"Where are you going?"
"Never mind," he answered; and, slinging his weapon over hisshoulder, strode off down the gorge and so away into the heart of themountains to the haunts of the wild beasts. Amongst them all therewas none so fierce and so dangerous as himself.
The prediction of the Mormon was only too well fulfilled. Whether itwas the terrible death of her father or the effects of the hatefulmarriage into which she had been forced, poor Lucy never held up herhead again, but pined away and died within a month. Her sottishhusband, who had married her principally for the sake of JohnFerrier's property, did not affect any great grief at hisbereavement; but his other wives mourned over her, and sat up withher the night before the burial, as is the Mormon custom. They weregrouped round the bier in the early hours of the morning, when, totheir inexpressible fear and astonishment, the door was flung open,and a savage-looking, weather-beaten man in tattered garments strodeinto the room. Without a glance or a word to the cowering women, hewalked up to the white silent figure which had once contained thepure soul of Lucy Ferrier. Stooping over her, he pressed his lipsreverently to her cold forehead, and then, snatching up her hand, hetook the wedding-ring from her finger. "She shall not be buried inthat," he cried with a fierce snarl, and before an alarm could beraised sprang down the stairs and was gone. So strange and so briefwas the episode, that the watchers might have found it hard tobelieve it themselves or persuade other people of it, had it not beenfor the undeniable fact that the circlet of gold which marked her ashaving been a bride had disappeared.
For some months Jefferson Hope lingered among the mountains, leadinga strange wild life, and nursing in his heart the fierce desire forvengeance which possessed him. Tales were told in the City of theweird figure which was seen prowling about the suburbs, and whichhaunted the lonely mountain gorges. Once a bullet whistled throughStangerson's window and flattened itself upon the wall within a footof him. On another occasion, as Drebber passed under a cliff a greatboulder crashed down on him, and he only escaped a terrible death bythrowing himself upon his face. The two young Mormons were not longin discovering the reason of these attempts upon their lives, and ledrepeated expeditions into the mountains in the hope of capturing orkilling their enemy, but always without success. Then they adoptedthe precaution of never going out alone or after nightfall, and ofhaving their houses guarded. After a time they were able to relaxthese measures, for nothing was either heard or seen of theiropponent, and they hoped that time had cooled his vindictiveness.
Far from doing so, it had, if anything, augmented it. The hunter'smind was of a hard, unyielding nature, and the predominant idea ofrevenge had taken such complete possession of it that there was noroom for any other emotion. He was, however, above all thingspractical. He soon realized that even his iron constitution could notstand the incessant strain which he was putting upon it. Exposure andwant of wholesome food were wearing him out. If he died like a dogamong the mountains, what was to become of his revenge then? And yetsuch a death was sure to overtake him if he persisted. He felt thatthat was to play his enemy's game, so he reluctantly returned to theold Nevada mines, there to recruit his health and to amass moneyenough to allow him to pursue his object without privation.
His intention had been to be absent a year at the most, but acombination of unforeseen circumstances prevented his leaving themines for nearly five. At the end of that time, however, his memoryof his wrongs and his craving for revenge were quite as keen as onthat memorable night when he had stood by John Ferrier's grave.Disguised, and under an assumed name, he returned to Salt Lake City,careless what became of his own life, as long as he obtained what heknew to be justice. There he found evil tidings awaiting him. Therehad been a schism among the Chosen People a few months before, someof the younger members of the Church having rebelled against theauthority of the Elders, and the result had been the secession of acertain number of the malcontents, who had left Utah and becomeGentiles. Among these had been Drebber and Stangerson; and no oneknew whither they had gone. Rumour reported that Drebber had managedto convert a large part of his property into money, and that he haddeparted a wealthy man, while his companion, Stangerson, wascomparatively poor. There was no clue at all, however, as to theirwhereabouts.
Many a man, however vindictive, would have abandoned all thought ofrevenge in the face of such a difficulty, but Jefferson Hope neverfaltered for a moment. With the small competence he possessed, ekedout by such employment as he could pick up, he travelled from town totown through the United States in quest of his enemies. Year passedinto year, his black hair turned grizzled, but still he wandered on,a human bloodhound, with his mind wholly set upon the one object uponwhich he had devoted his life. At last his perseverance was rewarded.It was but a glance of a face in a window, but that one glance toldhim that Cleveland in Ohio possessed the men whom he was in pursuitof. He returned to his miserable lodgings with his plan of vengeanceall arranged. It chanced, however, that Drebber, looking from hiswindow, had recognized the vagrant in the street, and had read murderin his eyes. He hurried before a justice of the peace, accompanied byStangerson, who had become his private secretary, and represented tohim that they were in danger of their lives from the jealousy andhatred of an old rival. That evening Jefferson Hope was taken intocustody, and not being able to find sureties, was detained for someweeks. When at last he was liberated, it was only to find thatDrebber's house was deserted, and that he and his secretary haddeparted for Europe.
Again the avenger had been foiled, and again his concentrated hatredurged him to continue the pursuit. Funds were wanting, however, andfor some time he had to return to work, saving every dollar for hisapproaching journey. At last, having collected enough to keep life inhim, he departed for Europe, and tracked his enemies from city tocity, working his way in any menial capacity, but never overtakingthe fugitives. When he reached St. Petersburg they had departed forParis; and when he followed them there he learned that they had justset off for Copenhagen. At the Danish capital he was again a few dayslate, for they had journeyed on to London, where he at last succeededin running them to earth. As to what occurred there, we cannot dobetter than quote the old hunter's own account, as duly recorded inDr. Watson's Journal, to which we are already under such obligations.




     CHAPTER VI     A Continuation Of The Reminiscences Of John Watson, M.D.

Our prisoner's furious resistance did not apparently indicate anyferocity in his disposition towards ourselves, for on finding himselfpowerless, he smiled in an affable manner, and expressed his hopesthat he had not hurt any of us in the scuffle. "I guess you're goingto take me to the police-station," he remarked to Sherlock Holmes."My cab's at the door. If you'll loose my legs I'll walk down to it.I'm not so light to lift as I used to be."
Gregson and Lestrade exchanged glances as if they thought thisproposition rather a bold one; but Holmes at once took the prisonerat his word, and loosened the towel which we had bound round hisankles. He rose and stretched his legs, as though to assure himselfthat they were free once more. I remember that I thought to myself,as I eyed him, that I had seldom seen a more powerfully built man;and his dark sunburned face bore an expression of determination andenergy which was as formidable as his personal strength.
"If there's a vacant place for a chief of the police, I reckon youare the man for it," he said, gazing with undisguised admiration atmy fellow-lodger. "The way you kept on my trail was a caution."
"You had better come with me," said Holmes to the two detectives.
"I can drive you," said Lestrade.
"Good! and Gregson can come inside with me. You too, Doctor, you havetaken an interest in the case and may as well stick to us."
I assented gladly, and we all descended together. Our prisoner madeno attempt at escape, but stepped calmly into the cab which had beenhis, and we followed him. Lestrade mounted the box, whipped up thehorse, and brought us in a very short time to our destination. Wewere ushered into a small chamber where a police Inspector noted downour prisoner's name and the names of the men with whose murder he hadbeen charged. The official was a white-faced unemotional man, whowent through his duties in a dull mechanical way. "The prisoner willbe put before the magistrates in the course of the week," he said;"in the mean time, Mr. Jefferson Hope, have you anything that youwish to say? I must warn you that your words will be taken down, andmay be used against you."
"I've got a good deal to say," our prisoner said slowly. "I want totell you gentlemen all about it."
"Hadn't you better reserve that for your trial?" asked the Inspector.
"I may never be tried," he answered. "You needn't look startled. Itisn't suicide I am thinking of. Are you a Doctor?" He turned hisfierce dark eyes upon me as he asked this last question.
"Yes; I am," I answered.
"Then put your hand here," he said, with a smile, motioning with hismanacled wrists towards his chest.
I did so; and became at once conscious of an extraordinary throbbingand commotion which was going on inside. The walls of his chestseemed to thrill and quiver as a frail building would do inside whensome powerful engine was at work. In the silence of the room I couldhear a dull humming and buzzing noise which proceeded from the samesource.
"Why," I cried, "you have an aortic aneurism!"
"That's what they call it," he said, placidly. "I went to a Doctorlast week about it, and he told me that it is bound to burst beforemany days passed. It has been getting worse for years. I got it fromover-exposure and under-feeding among the Salt Lake Mountains. I'vedone my work now, and I don't care how soon I go, but I should liketo leave some account of the business behind me. I don't want to beremembered as a common cut-throat."
The Inspector and the two detectives had a hurried discussion as tothe advisability of allowing him to tell his story.
"Do you consider, Doctor, that there is immediate danger?" the formerasked.
"Most certainly there is," I answered.
"In that case it is clearly our duty, in the interests of justice, totake his statement," said the Inspector. "You are at liberty, sir, togive your account, which I again warn you will be taken down."
"I'll sit down, with your leave," the prisoner said, suiting theaction to the word. "This aneurism of mine makes me easily tired, andthe tussle we had half an hour ago has not mended matters. I'm on thebrink of the grave, and I am not likely to lie to you. Every word Isay is the absolute truth, and how you use it is a matter of noconsequence to me."
With these words, Jefferson Hope leaned back in his chair and beganthe following remarkable statement. He spoke in a calm and methodicalmanner, as though the events which he narrated were commonplaceenough. I can vouch for the accuracy of the subjoined account, for Ihave had access to Lestrade's note-book, in which the prisoner'swords were taken down exactly as they were uttered.
"It don't much matter to you why I hated these men," he said; "it'senough that they were guilty of the death of two human beings--afather and a daughter--and that they had, therefore, forfeited theirown lives. After the lapse of time that has passed since their crime,it was impossible for me to secure a conviction against them in anycourt. I knew of their guilt though, and I determined that I shouldbe judge, jury, and executioner all rolled into one. You'd have donethe same, if you have any manhood in you, if you had been in myplace.
"That girl that I spoke of was to have married me twenty years ago.She was forced into marrying that same Drebber, and broke her heartover it. I took the marriage ring from her dead finger, and I vowedthat his dying eyes should rest upon that very ring, and that hislast thoughts should be of the crime for which he was punished. Ihave carried it about with me, and have followed him and hisaccomplice over two continents until I caught them. They thought totire me out, but they could not do it. If I die to-morrow, as islikely enough, I die knowing that my work in this world is done, andwell done. They have perished, and by my hand. There is nothing leftfor me to hope for, or to desire.
"They were rich and I was poor, so that it was no easy matter for meto follow them. When I got to London my pocket was about empty, and Ifound that I must turn my hand to something for my living. Drivingand riding are as natural to me as walking, so I applied at acabowner's office, and soon got employment. I was to bring a certainsum a week to the owner, and whatever was over that I might keep formyself. There was seldom much over, but I managed to scrape alongsomehow. The hardest job was to learn my way about, for I reckon thatof all the mazes that ever were contrived, this city is the mostconfusing. I had a map beside me though, and when once I had spottedthe principal hotels and stations, I got on pretty well.
"It was some time before I found out where my two gentlemen wereliving; but I inquired and inquired until at last I dropped acrossthem. They were at a boarding-house at Camberwell, over on the otherside of the river. When once I found them out I knew that I had themat my mercy. I had grown my beard, and there was no chance of theirrecognizing me. I would dog them and follow them until I saw myopportunity. I was determined that they should not escape me again.
"They were very near doing it for all that. Go where they would aboutLondon, I was always at their heels. Sometimes I followed them on mycab, and sometimes on foot, but the former was the best, for thenthey could not get away from me. It was only early in the morning orlate at night that I could earn anything, so that I began to getbehind hand with my employer. I did not mind that, however, as longas I could lay my hand upon the men I wanted.
"They were very cunning, though. They must have thought that therewas some chance of their being followed, for they would never go outalone, and never after nightfall. During two weeks I drove behindthem every day, and never once saw them separate. Drebber himself wasdrunk half the time, but Stangerson was not to be caught napping. Iwatched them late and early, but never saw the ghost of a chance; butI was not discouraged, for something told me that the hour had almostcome. My only fear was that this thing in my chest might burst alittle too soon and leave my work undone.
"At last, one evening I was driving up and down Torquay Terrace, asthe street was called in which they boarded, when I saw a cab driveup to their door. Presently some luggage was brought out, and after atime Drebber and Stangerson followed it, and drove off. I whipped upmy horse and kept within sight of them, feeling very ill at ease, forI feared that they were going to shift their quarters. At EustonStation they got out, and I left a boy to hold my horse, and followedthem on to the platform. I heard them ask for the Liverpool train,and the guard answer that one had just gone and there would not beanother for some hours. Stangerson seemed to be put out at that, butDrebber was rather pleased than otherwise. I got so close to them inthe bustle that I could hear every word that passed between them.Drebber said that he had a little business of his own to do, and thatif the other would wait for him he would soon rejoin him. Hiscompanion remonstrated with him, and reminded him that they hadresolved to stick together. Drebber answered that the matter was adelicate one, and that he must go alone. I could not catch whatStangerson said to that, but the other burst out swearing, andreminded him that he was nothing more than his paid servant, and thathe must not presume to dictate to him. On that the Secretary gave itup as a bad job, and simply bargained with him that if he missed thelast train he should rejoin him at Halliday's Private Hotel; to whichDrebber answered that he would be back on the platform before eleven,and made his way out of the station.
"The moment for which I had waited so long had at last come. I had myenemies within my power. Together they could protect each other, butsingly they were at my mercy. I did not act, however, with undueprecipitation. My plans were already formed. There is no satisfactionin vengeance unless the offender has time to realize who it is thatstrikes him, and why retribution has come upon him. I had my plansarranged by which I should have the opportunity of making the man whohad wronged me understand that his old sin had found him out. Itchanced that some days before a gentleman who had been engaged inlooking over some houses in the Brixton Road had dropped the key ofone of them in my carriage. It was claimed that same evening, andreturned; but in the interval I had taken a moulding of it, and had aduplicate constructed. By means of this I had access to at least onespot in this great city where I could rely upon being free frominterruption. How to get Drebber to that house was the difficultproblem which I had now to solve.
"He walked down the road and went into one or two liquor shops,staying for nearly half-an-hour in the last of them. When he came outhe staggered in his walk, and was evidently pretty well on. There wasa hansom just in front of me, and he hailed it. I followed it soclose that the nose of my horse was within a yard of his driver thewhole way. We rattled across Waterloo Bridge and through miles ofstreets, until, to my astonishment, we found ourselves back in theTerrace in which he had boarded. I could not imagine what hisintention was in returning there; but I went on and pulled up my caba hundred yards or so from the house. He entered it, and his hansomdrove away. Give me a glass of water, if you please. My mouth getsdry with the talking."
I handed him the glass, and he drank it down.
"That's better," he said. "Well, I waited for a quarter of an hour,or more, when suddenly there came a noise like people strugglinginside the house. Next moment the door was flung open and two menappeared, one of whom was Drebber, and the other was a young chapwhom I had never seen before. This fellow had Drebber by the collar,and when they came to the head of the steps he gave him a shove and akick which sent him half across the road. 'You hound,' he cried,shaking his stick at him; 'I'll teach you to insult an honest girl!'He was so hot that I think he would have thrashed Drebber with hiscudgel, only that the cur staggered away down the road as fast as hislegs would carry him. He ran as far as the corner, and then, seeingmy cab, he hailed me and jumped in. 'Drive me to Halliday's PrivateHotel,' said he.
"When I had him fairly inside my cab, my heart jumped so with joythat I feared lest at this last moment my aneurism might go wrong. Idrove along slowly, weighing in my own mind what it was best to do. Imight take him right out into the country, and there in some desertedlane have my last interview with him. I had almost decided upon this,when he solved the problem for me. The craze for drink had seized himagain, and he ordered me to pull up outside a gin palace. He went in,leaving word that I should wait for him. There he remained untilclosing time, and when he came out he was so far gone that I knew thegame was in my own hands.
"Don't imagine that I intended to kill him in cold blood. It wouldonly have been rigid justice if I had done so, but I could not bringmyself to do it. I had long determined that he should have a show forhis life if he chose to take advantage of it. Among the many billetswhich I have filled in America during my wandering life, I was oncejanitor and sweeper out of the laboratory at York College. One daythe professor was lecturing on poisons, and he showed his studentssome alkaloid, as he called it, which he had extracted from someSouth American arrow poison, and which was so powerful that the leastgrain meant instant death. I spotted the bottle in which thispreparation was kept, and when they were all gone, I helped myself toa little of it. I was a fairly good dispenser, so I worked thisalkaloid into small, soluble pills, and each pill I put in a box witha similar pill made without the poison. I determined at the time thatwhen I had my chance, my gentlemen should each have a draw out of oneof these boxes, while I ate the pill that remained. It would be quiteas deadly, and a good deal less noisy than firing across ahandkerchief. From that day I had always my pill boxes about with me,and the time had now come when I was to use them.
"It was nearer one than twelve, and a wild, bleak night, blowing hardand raining in torrents. Dismal as it was outside, I was gladwithin--so glad that I could have shouted out from pure exultation.If any of you gentlemen have ever pined for a thing, and longed forit during twenty long years, and then suddenly found it within yourreach, you would understand my feelings. I lit a cigar, and puffed atit to steady my nerves, but my hands were trembling, and my templesthrobbing with excitement. As I drove, I could see old John Ferrierand sweet Lucy looking at me out of the darkness and smiling at me,just as plain as I see you all in this room. All the way they wereahead of me, one on each side of the horse until I pulled up at thehouse in the Brixton Road.
"There was not a soul to be seen, nor a sound to be heard, except thedripping of the rain. When I looked in at the window, I found Drebberall huddled together in a drunken sleep. I shook him by the arm,'It's time to get out,' I said.
"'All right, cabby,' said he.
"I suppose he thought we had come to the hotel that he had mentioned,for he got out without another word, and followed me down the garden.I had to walk beside him to keep him steady, for he was still alittle top-heavy. When we came to the door, I opened it, and led himinto the front room. I give you my word that all the way, the fatherand the daughter were walking in front of us.
"'It's infernally dark,' said he, stamping about.
"'We'll soon have a light,' I said, striking a match and putting itto a wax candle which I had brought with me. 'Now, Enoch Drebber,' Icontinued, turning to him, and holding the light to my own face, 'whoam I?'
"He gazed at me with bleared, drunken eyes for a moment, and then Isaw a horror spring up in them, and convulse his whole features,which showed me that he knew me. He staggered back with a livid face,and I saw the perspiration break out upon his brow, while his teethchattered in his head. At the sight, I leaned my back against thedoor and laughed loud and long. I had always known that vengeancewould be sweet, but I had never hoped for the contentment of soulwhich now possessed me.
"'You dog!' I said; 'I have hunted you from Salt Lake City to St.Petersburg, and you have always escaped me. Now, at last yourwanderings have come to an end, for either you or I shall never seeto-morrow's sun rise.' He shrunk still further away as I spoke, and Icould see on his face that he thought I was mad. So I was for thetime. The pulses in my temples beat like sledge-hammers, and Ibelieve I would have had a fit of some sort if the blood had notgushed from my nose and relieved me.
"'What do you think of Lucy Ferrier now?' I cried, locking the door,and shaking the key in his face. 'Punishment has been slow in coming,but it has overtaken you at last.' I saw his coward lips tremble as Ispoke. He would have begged for his life, but he knew well that itwas useless.
"'Would you murder me?' he stammered.
"'There is no murder,' I answered. 'Who talks of murdering a mad dog?What mercy had you upon my poor darling, when you dragged her fromher slaughtered father, and bore her away to your accursed andshameless harem.'
"'It was not I who killed her father,' he cried.
"'But it was you who broke her innocent heart,' I shrieked, thrustingthe box before him. 'Let the high God judge between us. Choose andeat. There is death in one and life in the other. I shall take whatyou leave. Let us see if there is justice upon the earth, or if weare ruled by chance.'
"He cowered away with wild cries and prayers for mercy, but I drew myknife and held it to his throat until he had obeyed me. Then Iswallowed the other, and we stood facing one another in silence for aminute or more, waiting to see which was to live and which was todie. Shall I ever forget the look which came over his face when thefirst warning pangs told him that the poison was in his system? Ilaughed as I saw it, and held Lucy's marriage ring in front of hiseyes. It was but for a moment, for the action of the alkaloid israpid. A spasm of pain contorted his features; he threw his hands outin front of him, staggered, and then, with a hoarse cry, fell heavilyupon the floor. I turned him over with my foot, and placed my handupon his heart. There was no movement. He was dead!
"The blood had been streaming from my nose, but I had taken no noticeof it. I don't know what it was that put it into my head to writeupon the wall with it. Perhaps it was some mischievous idea ofsetting the police upon a wrong track, for I felt light-hearted andcheerful. I remembered a German being found in New York with RACHEwritten up above him, and it was argued at the time in the newspapersthat the secret societies must have done it. I guessed that whatpuzzled the New Yorkers would puzzle the Londoners, so I dipped myfinger in my own blood and printed it on a convenient place on thewall. Then I walked down to my cab and found that there was nobodyabout, and that the night was still very wild. I had driven somedistance when I put my hand into the pocket in which I usually keptLucy's ring, and found that it was not there. I was thunderstruck atthis, for it was the only memento that I had of her. Thinking that Imight have dropped it when I stooped over Drebber's body, I droveback, and leaving my cab in a side street, I went boldly up to thehouse--for I was ready to dare anything rather than lose the ring.When I arrived there, I walked right into the arms of apolice-officer who was coming out, and only managed to disarm hissuspicions by pretending to be hopelessly drunk.
"That was how Enoch Drebber came to his end. All I had to do then wasto do as much for Stangerson, and so pay off John Ferrier's debt. Iknew that he was staying at Halliday's Private Hotel, and I hungabout all day, but he never came out. I fancy that he suspectedsomething when Drebber failed to put in an appearance. He wascunning, was Stangerson, and always on his guard. If he thought hecould keep me off by staying indoors he was very much mistaken. Isoon found out which was the window of his bedroom, and early nextmorning I took advantage of some ladders which were lying in the lanebehind the hotel, and so made my way into his room in the grey of thedawn. I woke him up and told him that the hour had come when he wasto answer for the life he had taken so long before. I describedDrebber's death to him, and I gave him the same choice of thepoisoned pills. Instead of grasping at the chance of safety whichthat offered him, he sprang from his bed and flew at my throat. Inself-defence I stabbed him to the heart. It would have been the samein any case, for Providence would never have allowed his guilty handto pick out anything but the poison.
"I have little more to say, and it's as well, for I am about done up.I went on cabbing it for a day or so, intending to keep at it until Icould save enough to take me back to America. I was standing in theyard when a ragged youngster asked if there was a cabby there calledJefferson Hope, and said that his cab was wanted by a gentleman at221b, Baker Street. I went round, suspecting no harm, and the nextthing I knew, this young man here had the bracelets on my wrists, andas neatly snackled as ever I saw in my life. That's the whole of mystory, gentlemen. You may consider me to be a murderer; but I holdthat I am just as much an officer of justice as you are."
So thrilling had the man's narrative been, and his manner was soimpressive that we had sat silent and absorbed. Even the professionaldetectives, blase as they were in every detail of crime, appeared tobe keenly interested in the man's story. When he finished we sat forsome minutes in a stillness which was only broken by the scratchingof Lestrade's pencil as he gave the finishing touches to hisshorthand account.
"There is only one point on which I should like a little moreinformation," Sherlock Holmes said at last. "Who was your accomplicewho came for the ring which I advertised?"
The prisoner winked at my friend jocosely. "I can tell my ownsecrets," he said, "but I don't get other people into trouble. I sawyour advertisement, and I thought it might be a plant, or it might bethe ring which I wanted. My friend volunteered to go and see. I thinkyou'll own he did it smartly."
"Not a doubt of that," said Holmes heartily.
"Now, gentlemen," the Inspector remarked gravely, "the forms of thelaw must be complied with. On Thursday the prisoner will be broughtbefore the magistrates, and your attendance will be required. Untilthen I will be responsible for him." He rang the bell as he spoke,and Jefferson Hope was led off by a couple of warders, while myfriend and I made our way out of the Station and took a cab back toBaker Street.




     CHAPTER VII     The Conclusion

We had all been warned to appear before the magistrates upon theThursday; but when the Thursday came there was no occasion for ourtestimony. A higher Judge had taken the matter in hand, and JeffersonHope had been summoned before a tribunal where strict justice wouldbe meted out to him. On the very night after his capture the aneurismburst, and he was found in the morning stretched upon the floor ofthe cell, with a placid smile upon his face, as though he had beenable in his dying moments to look back upon a useful life, and onwork well done.
"Gregson and Lestrade will be wild about his death," Holmes remarked,as we chatted it over next evening. "Where will their grandadvertisement be now?"
"I don't see that they had very much to do with his capture," Ianswered.
"What you do in this world is a matter of no consequence," returnedmy companion, bitterly. "The question is, what can you make peoplebelieve that you have done. Never mind," he continued, more brightly,after a pause. "I would not have missed the investigation foranything. There has been no better case within my recollection.Simple as it was, there were several most instructive points aboutit."
"Simple!" I ejaculated.
"Well, really, it can hardly be described as otherwise," saidSherlock Holmes, smiling at my surprise. "The proof of its intrinsicsimplicity is, that without any help save a few very ordinarydeductions I was able to lay my hand upon the criminal within threedays."
"That is true," said I.
"I have already explained to you that what is out of the common isusually a guide rather than a hindrance. In solving a problem of thissort, the grand thing is to be able to reason backwards. That is avery useful accomplishment, and a very easy one, but people do notpractise it much. In the every-day affairs of life it is more usefulto reason forwards, and so the other comes to be neglected. There arefifty who can reason synthetically for one who can reasonanalytically."
"I confess," said I, "that I do not quite follow you."
"I hardly expected that you would. Let me see if I can make itclearer. Most people, if you describe a train of events to them, willtell you what the result would be. They can put those events togetherin their minds, and argue from them that something will come to pass.There are few people, however, who, if you told them a result, wouldbe able to evolve from their own inner consciousness what the stepswere which led up to that result. This power is what I mean when Italk of reasoning backwards, or analytically."
"I understand," said I.
"Now this was a case in which you were given the result and had tofind everything else for yourself. Now let me endeavour to show youthe different steps in my reasoning. To begin at the beginning. Iapproached the house, as you know, on foot, and with my mind entirelyfree from all impressions. I naturally began by examining theroadway, and there, as I have already explained to you, I saw clearlythe marks of a cab, which, I ascertained by inquiry, must have beenthere during the night. I satisfied myself that it was a cab and nota private carriage by the narrow gauge of the wheels. The ordinaryLondon growler is considerably less wide than a gentleman's brougham.
"This was the first point gained. I then walked slowly down thegarden path, which happened to be composed of a clay soil, peculiarlysuitable for taking impressions. No doubt it appeared to you to be amere trampled line of slush, but to my trained eyes every mark uponits surface had a meaning. There is no branch of detective sciencewhich is so important and so much neglected as the art of tracingfootsteps. Happily, I have always laid great stress upon it, and muchpractice has made it second nature to me. I saw the heavy footmarksof the constables, but I saw also the track of the two men who hadfirst passed through the garden. It was easy to tell that they hadbeen before the others, because in places their marks had beenentirely obliterated by the others coming upon the top of them. Inthis way my second link was formed, which told me that the nocturnalvisitors were two in number, one remarkable for his height (as Icalculated from the length of his stride), and the other fashionablydressed, to judge from the small and elegant impression left by hisboots.
"On entering the house this last inference was confirmed. Mywell-booted man lay before me. The tall one, then, had done themurder, if murder there was. There was no wound upon the dead man'sperson, but the agitated expression upon his face assured me that hehad foreseen his fate before it came upon him. Men who die from heartdisease, or any sudden natural cause, never by any chance exhibitagitation upon their features. Having sniffed the dead man's lips Idetected a slightly sour smell, and I came to the conclusion that hehad had poison forced upon him. Again, I argued that it had beenforced upon him from the hatred and fear expressed upon his face. Bythe method of exclusion, I had arrived at this result, for no otherhypothesis would meet the facts. Do not imagine that it was a veryunheard of idea. The forcible administration of poison is by no meansa new thing in criminal annals. The cases of Dolsky in Odessa, and ofLeturier in Montpellier, will occur at once to any toxicologist.
"And now came the great question as to the reason why. Robbery hadnot been the object of the murder, for nothing was taken. Was itpolitics, then, or was it a woman? That was the question whichconfronted me. I was inclined from the first to the lattersupposition. Political assassins are only too glad to do their workand to fly. This murder had, on the contrary, been done mostdeliberately, and the perpetrator had left his tracks all over theroom, showing that he had been there all the time. It must have beena private wrong, and not a political one, which called for such amethodical revenge. When the inscription was discovered upon the wallI was more inclined than ever to my opinion. The thing was tooevidently a blind. When the ring was found, however, it settled thequestion. Clearly the murderer had used it to remind his victim ofsome dead or absent woman. It was at this point that I asked Gregsonwhether he had enquired in his telegram to Cleveland as to anyparticular point in Mr. Drebber's former career. He answered, youremember, in the negative.
"I then proceeded to make a careful examination of the room, whichconfirmed me in my opinion as to the murderer's height, and furnishedme with the additional details as to the Trichinopoly cigar and thelength of his nails. I had already come to the conclusion, sincethere were no signs of a struggle, that the blood which covered thefloor had burst from the murderer's nose in his excitement. I couldperceive that the track of blood coincided with the track of hisfeet. It is seldom that any man, unless he is very full-blooded,breaks out in this way through emotion, so I hazarded the opinionthat the criminal was probably a robust and ruddy-faced man. Eventsproved that I had judged correctly.
"Having left the house, I proceeded to do what Gregson had neglected.I telegraphed to the head of the police at Cleveland, limiting myenquiry to the circumstances connected with the marriage of EnochDrebber. The answer was conclusive. It told me that Drebber hadalready applied for the protection of the law against an old rival inlove, named Jefferson Hope, and that this same Hope was at present inEurope. I knew now that I held the clue to the mystery in my hand,and all that remained was to secure the murderer.
"I had already determined in my own mind that the man who had walkedinto the house with Drebber, was none other than the man who haddriven the cab. The marks in the road showed me that the horse hadwandered on in a way which would have been impossible had there beenanyone in charge of it. Where, then, could the driver be, unless hewere inside the house? Again, it is absurd to suppose that any saneman would carry out a deliberate crime under the very eyes, as itwere, of a third person, who was sure to betray him. Lastly,supposing one man wished to dog another through London, what bettermeans could he adopt than to turn cabdriver. All these considerationsled me to the irresistible conclusion that Jefferson Hope was to befound among the jarveys of the Metropolis.
"If he had been one there was no reason to believe that he had ceasedto be. On the contrary, from his point of view, any sudden chancewould be likely to draw attention to himself. He would, probably, fora time at least, continue to perform his duties. There was no reasonto suppose that he was going under an assumed name. Why should hechange his name in a country where no one knew his original one? Itherefore organized my Street Arab detective corps, and sent themsystematically to every cab proprietor in London until they ferretedout the man that I wanted. How well they succeeded, and how quickly Itook advantage of it, are still fresh in your recollection. Themurder of Stangerson was an incident which was entirely unexpected,but which could hardly in any case have been prevented. Through it,as you know, I came into possession of the pills, the existence ofwhich I had already surmised. You see the whole thing is a chain oflogical sequences without a break or flaw."
"It is wonderful!" I cried. "Your merits should be publiclyrecognized. You should publish an account of the case. If you won't,I will for you."
"You may do what you like, Doctor," he answered. "See here!" hecontinued, handing a paper over to me, "look at this!"
It was the Echo for the day, and the paragraph to which he pointedwas devoted to the case in question.
"The public," it said, "have lost a sensational treat through thesudden death of the man Hope, who was suspected of the murder of Mr.Enoch Drebber and of Mr. Joseph Stangerson. The details of the casewill probably be never known now, though we are informed upon goodauthority that the crime was the result of an old standing andromantic feud, in which love and Mormonism bore a part. It seems thatboth the victims belonged, in their younger days, to the Latter DaySaints, and Hope, the deceased prisoner, hails also from Salt LakeCity. If the case has had no other effect, it, at least, brings outin the most striking manner the efficiency of our detective policeforce, and will serve as a lesson to all foreigners that they will dowisely to settle their feuds at home, and not to carry them on toBritish soil. It is an open secret that the credit of this smartcapture belongs entirely to the well-known Scotland Yard officials,Messrs. Lestrade and Gregson. The man was apprehended, it appears, inthe rooms of a certain Mr. Sherlock Holmes, who has himself, as anamateur, shown some talent in the detective line, and who, with suchinstructors, may hope in time to attain to some degree of theirskill. It is expected that a testimonial of some sort will bepresented to the two officers as a fitting recognition of theirservices."
"Didn't I tell you so when we started?" cried Sherlock Holmes with alaugh. "That's the result of all our Study in Scarlet: to get them atestimonial!"
"Never mind," I answered, "I have all the facts in my journal, andthe public shall know them. In the meantime you must make yourselfcontented by the consciousness of success, like the Roman miser--
                 "'Populus me sibilat, at mihi plaudo            Ipse domi simul ac nummos contemplar in arca.'"





                         THE SIGN OF THE FOUR




                           Table of contents   The Science of Deduction   The Statement of the Case   In Quest of a Solution   The Story of the Bald-Headed Man   The Tragedy of Pondicherry Lodge   Sherlock Holmes Gives a Demonstration   The Episode of the Barrel   The Baker Street Irregulars   A Break in the Chain   The End of the Islander   The Great Agra Treasure   The Strange Story of Jonathan Small














     CHAPTER I     The Science of Deduction

Sherlock Holmes took his bottle from the corner of the mantelpieceand his hypodermic syringe from its neat morocco case. With his long,white, nervous fingers he adjusted the delicate needle, and rolledback his left shirt-cuff. For some little time his eyes restedthoughtfully upon the sinewy forearm and wrist all dotted and scarredwith innumerable puncture-marks. Finally he thrust the sharp pointhome, pressed down the tiny piston, and sank back into thevelvet-lined arm-chair with a long sigh of satisfaction.
Three times a day for many months I had witnessed this performance,but custom had not reconciled my mind to it. On the contrary, fromday to day I had become more irritable at the sight, and myconscience swelled nightly within me at the thought that I had lackedthe courage to protest. Again and again I had registered a vow that Ishould deliver my soul upon the subject, but there was that in thecool, nonchalant air of my companion which made him the last man withwhom one would care to take anything approaching to a liberty. Hisgreat powers, his masterly manner, and the experience which I had hadof his many extraordinary qualities, all made me diffident andbackward in crossing him.
Yet upon that afternoon, whether it was the Beaune which I had takenwith my lunch, or the additional exasperation produced by the extremedeliberation of his manner, I suddenly felt that I could hold out nolonger.
"Which is it to-day?" I asked,--"morphine or cocaine?"
He raised his eyes languidly from the old black-letter volume whichhe had opened. "It is cocaine," he said,--"a seven-per-cent solution.Would you care to try it?"
"No, indeed," I answered, brusquely. "My constitution has not gotover the Afghan campaign yet. I cannot afford to throw any extrastrain upon it."
He smiled at my vehemence. "Perhaps you are right, Watson," he said."I suppose that its influence is physically a bad one. I find it,however, so transcendently stimulating and clarifying to the mindthat its secondary action is a matter of small moment."
"But consider!" I said, earnestly. "Count the cost! Your brain may,as you say, be roused and excited, but it is a pathological andmorbid process, which involves increased tissue-change and may atlast leave a permanent weakness. You know, too, what a black reactioncomes upon you. Surely the game is hardly worth the candle. Whyshould you, for a mere passing pleasure, risk the loss of those greatpowers with which you have been endowed?  Remember that I speak notonly as one comrade to another, but as a medical man to one for whoseconstitution he is to some extent answerable."
He did not seem offended. On the contrary, he put his fingertipstogether and leaned his elbows on the arms of his chair, like one whohas a relish for conversation.
"My mind," he said, "rebels at stagnation. Give me problems, give mework, give me the most abstruse cryptogram or the most intricateanalysis, and I am in my own proper atmosphere. I can dispense thenwith artificial stimulants. But I abhor the dull routine ofexistence. I crave for mental exaltation. That is why I have chosenmy own particular profession,--or rather created it, for I am theonly one in the world."
"The only unofficial detective?" I said, raising my eyebrows.
"The only unofficial consulting detective," he answered.  "I am thelast and highest court of appeal in detection. When Gregson orLestrade or Athelney Jones are out of their depths--which, by theway, is their normal state--the matter is laid before me. I examinethe data, as an expert, and pronounce a specialist's opinion. I claimno credit in such cases. My name figures in no newspaper. The workitself, the pleasure of finding a field for my peculiar powers, is myhighest reward. But you have yourself had some experience of mymethods of work in the Jefferson Hope case."
"Yes, indeed," said I, cordially. "I was never so struck by anythingin my life. I even embodied it in a small brochure with the somewhatfantastic title of 'A Study in Scarlet.'"
He shook his head sadly. "I glanced over it," said he.  "Honestly, Icannot congratulate you upon it. Detection is, or ought to be, anexact science, and should be treated in the same cold and unemotionalmanner. You have attempted to tinge it with romanticism, whichproduces much the same effect as if you worked a love-story or anelopement into the fifth proposition of Euclid."
"But the romance was there," I remonstrated. "I could not tamper withthe facts."
"Some facts should be suppressed, or at least a just sense ofproportion should be observed in treating them. The only point in thecase which deserved mention was the curious analytical reasoning fromeffects to causes by which I succeeded in unraveling it."
I was annoyed at this criticism of a work which had been speciallydesigned to please him. I confess, too, that I was irritated by theegotism which seemed to demand that every line of my pamphlet shouldbe devoted to his own special doings. More than once during the yearsthat I had lived with him in Baker Street I had observed that a smallvanity underlay my companion's quiet and didactic manner. I made noremark, however, but sat nursing my wounded leg. I had a Jezailbullet through it some time before, and, though it did not prevent mefrom walking, it ached wearily at every change of the weather.
"My practice has extended recently to the Continent," said Holmes,after a while, filling up his old brier-root pipe. "I was consultedlast week by Francois Le Villard, who, as you probably know, has comerather to the front lately in the French detective service. He hasall the Celtic power of quick intuition, but he is deficient in thewide range of exact knowledge which is essential to the higherdevelopments of his art. The case was concerned with a will, andpossessed some features of interest. I was able to refer him to twoparallel cases, the one at Riga in 1857, and the other at St. Louisin 1871, which have suggested to him the true solution. Here is theletter which I had this morning acknowledging my assistance." Hetossed over, as he spoke, a crumpled sheet of foreign notepaper. Iglanced my eyes down it, catching a profusion of notes of admiration,with stray magnifiques, coup-de-matres and tours-de-force, alltestifying to the ardent admiration of the Frenchman.
"He speaks as a pupil to his master," said I.
"Oh, he rates my assistance too highly," said Sherlock Holmes,lightly. "He has considerable gifts himself. He possesses two out ofthe three qualities necessary for the ideal detective. He has thepower of observation and that of deduction. He is only wanting inknowledge; and that may come in time. He is now translating my smallworks into French."
"Your works?"
"Oh, didn't you know?" he cried, laughing. "Yes, I have been guiltyof several monographs. They are all upon technical subjects. Here,for example, is one 'Upon the Distinction between the Ashes of theVarious Tobaccoes.' In it I enumerate a hundred and forty forms ofcigar-, cigarette-, and pipe-tobacco, with colored platesillustrating the difference in the ash. It is a point which iscontinually turning up in criminal trials, and which is sometimes ofsupreme importance as a clue. If you can say definitely, for example,that some murder has been done by a man who was smoking an Indianlunkah, it obviously narrows your field of search. To the trained eyethere is as much difference between the black ash of a Trichinopolyand the white fluff of bird's-eye as there is between a cabbage and apotato."
"You have an extraordinary genius for minutiae," I remarked.
"I appreciate their importance. Here is my monograph upon the tracingof footsteps, with some remarks upon the uses of plaster of Paris asa preserver of impresses. Here, too, is a curious little work uponthe influence of a trade upon the form of the hand, with lithotypesof the hands of slaters, sailors, corkcutters, compositors, weavers,and diamond-polishers. That is a matter of great practical interestto the scientific detective,--especially in cases of unclaimedbodies, or in discovering the antecedents of criminals. But I wearyyou with my hobby."
"Not at all," I answered, earnestly. "It is of the greatest interestto me, especially since I have had the opportunity of observing yourpractical application of it. But you spoke just now of observationand deduction. Surely the one to some extent implies the other."
"Why, hardly," he answered, leaning back luxuriously in his armchair,and sending up thick blue wreaths from his pipe. "For example,observation shows me that you have been to the Wigmore StreetPost-Office this morning, but deduction lets me know that when thereyou dispatched a telegram."
"Right!" said I. "Right on both points! But I confess that I don'tsee how you arrived at it. It was a sudden impulse upon my part, andI have mentioned it to no one."
"It is simplicity itself," he remarked, chuckling at mysurprise,--"so absurdly simple that an explanation is superfluous;and yet it may serve to define the limits of observation and ofdeduction. Observation tells me that you have a little reddish mouldadhering to your instep. Just opposite the Seymour Street Office theyhave taken up the pavement and thrown up some earth which lies insuch a way that it is difficult to avoid treading in it in entering.The earth is of this peculiar reddish tint which is found, as far asI know, nowhere else in the neighborhood. So much is observation. Therest is deduction."
"How, then, did you deduce the telegram?"
"Why, of course I knew that you had not written a letter, since I satopposite to you all morning. I see also in your open desk there thatyou have a sheet of stamps and a thick bundle of postcards.  Whatcould you go into the post-office for, then, but to send a wire?Eliminate all other factors, and the one which remains must be thetruth."
"In this case it certainly is so," I replied, after a little thought."The thing, however, is, as you say, of the simplest.  Would youthink me impertinent if I were to put your theories to a more severetest?"
"On the contrary," he answered, "it would prevent me from taking asecond dose of cocaine. I should be delighted to look into anyproblem which you might submit to me."
"I have heard you say that it is difficult for a man to have anyobject in daily use without leaving the impress of his individualityupon it in such a way that a trained observer might read it. Now, Ihave here a watch which has recently come into my possession. Wouldyou have the kindness to let me have an opinion upon the character orhabits of the late owner?"
I handed him over the watch with some slight feeling of amusement inmy heart, for the test was, as I thought, an impossible one, and Iintended it as a lesson against the somewhat dogmatic tone which heoccasionally assumed. He balanced the watch in his hand, gazed hardat the dial, opened the back, and examined the works, first with hisnaked eyes and then with a powerful convex lens. I could hardly keepfrom smiling at his crestfallen face when he finally snapped the caseto and handed it back.
"There are hardly any data," he remarked. "The watch has beenrecently cleaned, which robs me of my most suggestive facts."
"You are right," I answered. "It was cleaned before being sent tome." In my heart I accused my companion of putting forward a mostlame and impotent excuse to cover his failure. What data could heexpect from an uncleaned watch?
"Though unsatisfactory, my research has not been entirely barren," heobserved, staring up at the ceiling with dreamy, lack-lustre eyes."Subject to your correction, I should judge that the watch belongedto your elder brother, who inherited it from your father."
"That you gather, no doubt, from the H. W. upon the back?"
"Quite so. The W. suggests your own name. The date of the watch isnearly fifty years back, and the initials are as old as the watch: soit was made for the last generation. Jewelry usually descents to theeldest son, and he is most likely to have the same name as thefather. Your father has, if I remember right, been dead many years.It has, therefore, been in the hands of your eldest brother."
"Right, so far," said I. "Anything else?"
"He was a man of untidy habits,--very untidy and careless. He wasleft with good prospects, but he threw away his chances, lived forsome time in poverty with occasional short intervals of prosperity,and finally, taking to drink, he died. That is all I can gather."
I sprang from my chair and limped impatiently about the room withconsiderable bitterness in my heart.
"This is unworthy of you, Holmes," I said. "I could not have believedthat you would have descended to this. You have made inquires intothe history of my unhappy brother, and you now pretend to deduce thisknowledge in some fanciful way. You cannot expect me to believe thatyou have read all this from his old watch! It is unkind, and, tospeak plainly, has a touch of charlatanism in it."
"My dear doctor," said he, kindly, "pray accept my apologies. Viewing the matter as an abstract problem, I had forgotten howpersonal and painful a thing it might be to you. I assure you,however, that I never even knew that you had a brother until youhanded me the watch."
"Then how in the name of all that is wonderful did you get thesefacts? They are absolutely correct in every particular."
"Ah, that is good luck. I could only say what was the balance ofprobability. I did not at all expect to be so accurate."
"But it was not mere guess-work?"
"No, no: I never guess. It is a shocking habit,--destructive to thelogical faculty. What seems strange to you is only so because you donot follow my train of thought or observe the small facts upon whichlarge inferences may depend. For example, I began by stating thatyour brother was careless. When you observe the lower part of thatwatch-case you notice that it is not only dinted in two places, butit is cut and marked all over from the habit of keeping other hardobjects, such as coins or keys, in the same pocket. Surely it is nogreat feat to assume that a man who treats a fifty-guinea watch socavalierly must be a careless man. Neither is it a very far-fetchedinference that a man who inherits one article of such value is prettywell provided for in other respects."
I nodded, to show that I followed his reasoning.
"It is very customary for pawnbrokers in England, when they take awatch, to scratch the number of the ticket with a pin-point upon theinside of the case. It is more handy than a label, as there is norisk of the number being lost or transposed. There are no less thanfour such numbers visible to my lens on the inside of this case.Inference,--that your brother was often at low water. Secondaryinference,--that he had occasional bursts of prosperity, or he couldnot have redeemed the pledge. Finally, I ask you to look at the innerplate, which contains the key-hole. Look at the thousands ofscratches all round the hole,--marks where the key has slipped. Whatsober man's key could have scored those grooves? But you will neversee a drunkard's watch without them. He winds it at night, and heleaves these traces of his unsteady hand. Where is the mystery in allthis?"
"It is as clear as daylight," I answered. "I regret the injusticewhich I did you. I should have had more faith in your marvellousfaculty. May I ask whether you have any professional inquiry on footat present?"
"None. Hence the cocaine. I cannot live without brain-work. What elseis there to live for? Stand at the window here. Was ever such adreary, dismal, unprofitable world? See how the yellow fog swirlsdown the street and drifts across the duncolored houses. What couldbe more hopelessly prosaic and material? What is the use of havingpowers, doctor, when one has no field upon which to exert them? Crimeis commonplace, existence is commonplace, and no qualities save thosewhich are commonplace have any function upon earth."
I had opened my mouth to reply to this tirade, when with a crispknock our landlady entered, bearing a card upon the brass salver.
"A young lady for you, sir," she said, addressing my companion.
"Miss Mary Morstan," he read. "Hum! I have no recollection of thename. Ask the young lady to step up, Mrs. Hudson. Don't go, doctor. Ishould prefer that you remain."




     CHAPTER II     The Statement of the Case

Miss Morstan entered the room with a firm step and an outwardcomposure of manner. She was a blonde young lady, small, dainty, wellgloved, and dressed in the most perfect taste. There was, however, aplainness and simplicity about her costume which bore with it asuggestion of limited means. The dress was a sombre grayish beige,untrimmed and unbraided, and she wore a small turban of the same dullhue, relieved only by a suspicion of white feather in the side. Herface had neither regularity of feature nor beauty of complexion, buther expression was sweet and amiable, and her large blue eyes weresingularly spiritual and sympathetic. In an experience of women whichextends over many nations and three separate continents, I have neverlooked upon a face which gave a clearer promise of a refined andsensitive nature. I could not but observe that as she took the seatwhich Sherlock Holmes placed for her, her lip trembled, her handquivered, and she showed every sign of intense inward agitation.
"I have come to you, Mr. Holmes," she said, "because you once enabledmy employer, Mrs. Cecil Forrester, to unravel a little domesticcomplication. She was much impressed by your kindness and skill."
"Mrs. Cecil Forrester," he repeated thoughtfully. "I believe that Iwas of some slight service to her. The case, however, as I rememberit, was a very simple one."
"She did not think so. But at least you cannot say the same of mine.I can hardly imagine anything more strange, more utterlyinexplicable, than the situation in which I find myself."
Holmes rubbed his hands, and his eyes glistened. He leaned forward inhis chair with an expression of extraordinary concentration upon hisclear-cut, hawklike features. "State your case," said he, in brisk,business tones.
I felt that my position was an embarrassing one. "You will, I amsure, excuse me," I said, rising from my chair.
To my surprise, the young lady held up her gloved hand to detain me."If your friend," she said, "would be good enough to stop, he mightbe of inestimable service to me."
I relapsed into my chair.
"Briefly," she continued, "the facts are these. My father was anofficer in an Indian regiment who sent me home when I was quite achild. My mother was dead, and I had no relative in England. I wasplaced, however, in a comfortable boarding establishment atEdinburgh, and there I remained until I was seventeen years of age.In the year 1878 my father, who was senior captain of his regiment,obtained twelve months' leave and came home. He telegraphed to mefrom London that he had arrived all safe, and directed me to comedown at once, giving the Langham Hotel as his address. His message,as I remember, was full of kindness and love. On reaching London Idrove to the Langham, and was informed that Captain Morstan wasstaying there, but that he had gone out the night before and had notyet returned. I waited all day without news of him. That night, onthe advice of the manager of the hotel, I communicated with thepolice, and next morning we advertised in all the papers. Ourinquiries let to no result; and from that day to this no word hasever been heard of my unfortunate father. He came home with his heartfull of hope, to find some peace, some comfort, and instead--" Sheput her hand to her throat, and a choking sob cut short the sentence.
"The date?" asked Holmes, opening his note-book.
"He disappeared upon the 3d of December, 1878,--nearly ten yearsago."
"His luggage?"
"Remained at the hotel. There was nothing in it to suggest aclue,--some clothes, some books, and a considerable number ofcuriosities from the Andaman Islands. He had been one of the officersin charge of the convict-guard there."
"Had he any friends in town?"
"Only one that we know of,--Major Sholto, of his own regiment, the34th Bombay Infantry. The major had retired some little time before,and lived at Upper Norwood. We communicated with him, of course, buthe did not even know that his brother officer was in England."
"A singular case," remarked Holmes.
"I have not yet described to you the most singular part. About sixyears ago--to be exact, upon the 4th of May, 1882--an advertisementappeared in the Times asking for the address of Miss Mary Morstan andstating that it would be to her advantage to come forward. There wasno name or address appended. I had at that time just entered thefamily of Mrs. Cecil Forrester in the capacity of governess. By heradvice I published my address in the advertisement column. The sameday there arrived through the post a small card-board box addressedto me, which I found to contain a very large and lustrous pearl. Noword of writing was enclosed. Since then every year upon the samedate there has always appeared a similar box, containing a similarpearl, without any clue as to the sender. They have been pronouncedby an expert to be of a rare variety and of considerable value. Youcan see for yourselves that they are very handsome." She opened aflat box as she spoke, and showed me six of the finest pearls that Ihad ever seen.
"Your statement is most interesting," said Sherlock Holmes.  "Hasanything else occurred to you?"
"Yes, and no later than to-day. That is why I have come to you.  Thismorning I received this letter, which you will perhaps read foryourself."
"Thank you," said Holmes. "The envelope too, please. Postmark,London, S.W. Date, July 7. Hum! Man's thumb-mark on corner,--probablypostman. Best quality paper. Envelopes at sixpence a packet.Particular man in his stationery. No address. 'Be at the third pillarfrom the left outside the Lyceum Theatre to-night at seven o'clock.If you are distrustful, bring two friends. You are a wronged woman,and shall have justice. Do not bring police. If you do, all will bein vain. Your unknown friend.' Well, really, this is a very prettylittle mystery.  What do you intend to do, Miss Morstan?"
"That is exactly what I want to ask you."
"Then we shall most certainly go. You and I and--yes, why, Dr. Watson is the very man. Your correspondent says two friends. He and Ihave worked together before."
"But would he come?" she asked, with something appealing in her voiceand expression.
"I should be proud and happy," said I, fervently, "if I can be of anyservice."
"You are both very kind," she answered. "I have led a retired life,and have no friends whom I could appeal to. If I am here at six itwill do, I suppose?"
"You must not be later," said Holmes. "There is one other point,however. Is this handwriting the same as that upon the pearl-boxaddresses?"
"I have them here," she answered, producing half a dozen pieces ofpaper.
"You are certainly a model client. You have the correct intuition.Let us see, now." He spread out the papers upon the table, and gavelittle darting glances from one to the other. "They are disguisedhands, except the letter," he said, presently, "but there can be noquestion as to the authorship. See how the irrepressible Greek e willbreak out, and see the twirl of the final s. They are undoubtedly bythe same person. I should not like to suggest false hopes, MissMorstan, but is there any resemblance between this hand and that ofyour father?"
"Nothing could be more unlike."
"I expected to hear you say so. We shall look out for you, then, atsix. Pray allow me to keep the papers. I may look into the matterbefore then. It is only half-past three. Au revoir, then."
"Au revoir," said our visitor, and, with a bright, kindly glance fromone to the other of us, she replaced her pearl-box in her bosom andhurried away. Standing at the window, I watched her walking brisklydown the street, until the gray turban and white feather were but aspeck in the sombre crowd.
"What a very attractive woman!" I exclaimed, turning to my companion.
He had lit his pipe again, and was leaning back with droopingeyelids. "Is she?" he said, languidly. "I did not observe."
"You really are an automaton,--a calculating-machine!" I cried."There is something positively inhuman in you at times."
He smiled gently. "It is of the first importance," he said, "not toallow your judgment to be biased by personal qualities. A client isto me a mere unit,--a factor in a problem. The emotional qualitiesare antagonistic to clear reasoning. I assure you that the mostwinning woman I ever knew was hanged for poisoning three littlechildren for their insurance-money, and the most repellant man of myacquaintance is a philanthropist who has spent nearly a quarter of amillion upon the London poor."
"In this case, however--"
"I never make exceptions. An exception disproves the rule. Have youever had occasion to study character in handwriting? What do you makeof this fellow's scribble?"
"It is legible and regular," I answered. "A man of business habitsand some force of character."
Holmes shook his head. "Look at his long letters," he said. "Theyhardly rise above the common herd. That d might be an a, and that lan e. Men of character always differentiate their long letters,however illegibly they may write. There is vacillation in his k's andself-esteem in his capitals. I am going out now. I have some fewreferences to make. Let me recommend this book,--one of the mostremarkable ever penned. It is Winwood Reade's Martyrdom of Man. Ishall be back in an hour."
I sat in the window with the volume in my hand, but my thoughts werefar from the daring speculations of the writer. My mind ran upon ourlate visitor,--her smiles, the deep rich tones of her voice, thestrange mystery which overhung her life. If she were seventeen at thetime of her father's disappearance she must be seven-and-twentynow,--a sweet age, when youth has lost its self-consciousness andbecome a little sobered by experience. So I sat and mused, until suchdangerous thoughts came into my head that I hurried away to my deskand plunged furiously into the latest treatise upon pathology. Whatwas I, an army surgeon with a weak leg and a weaker banking-account,that I should dare to think of such things? She was a unit, afactor,--nothing more. If my future were black, it was better surelyto face it like a man than to attempt to brighten it by merewill-o'-the-wisps of the imagination.




     CHAPTER III     In Quest of a Solution

It was half-past five before Holmes returned. He was bright, eager,and in excellent spirits,--a mood which in his case alternated withfits of the blackest depression.
"There is no great mystery in this matter," he said, taking the cupof tea which I had poured out for him. "The facts appear to admit ofonly one explanation."
"What! you have solved it already?"
"Well, that would be too much to say. I have discovered a suggestivefact, that is all. It is, however, very suggestive. The details arestill to be added. I have just found, on consulting the back files ofthe Times, that Major Sholto, of Upper Norword, late of the 34thBombay Infantry, died upon the 28th of April, 1882."
"I may be very obtuse, Holmes, but I fail to see what this suggests."
"No? You surprise me. Look at it in this way, then. Captain Morstandisappears. The only person in London whom he could have visited isMajor Sholto. Major Sholto denies having heard that he was in London.Four years later Sholto dies. Within a week of his death CaptainMorstan's daughter receives a valuable present, which is repeatedfrom year to year, and now culminates in a letter which describes heras a wronged woman. What wrong can it refer to except thisdeprivation of her father? And why should the presents beginimmediately after Sholto's death, unless it is that Sholto's heirknows something of the mystery and desires to make compensation? Haveyou any alternative theory which will meet the facts?"
"But what a strange compensation! And how strangely made! Why, too,should he write a letter now, rather than six years ago? Again, theletter speaks of giving her justice. What justice can she have? It istoo much to suppose that her father is still alive. There is no otherinjustice in her case that you know of."
"There are difficulties; there are certainly difficulties," saidSherlock Holmes, pensively. "But our expedition of to-night willsolve them all. Ah, here is a four-wheeler, and Miss Morstan isinside. Are you all ready? Then we had better go down, for it is alittle past the hour."
I picked up my hat and my heaviest stick, but I observed that Holmestook his revolver from his drawer and slipped it into his pocket. Itwas clear that he thought that our night's work might be a seriousone.
Miss Morstan was muffled in a dark cloak, and her sensitive face wascomposed, but pale. She must have been more than woman if she did notfeel some uneasiness at the strange enterprise upon which we wereembarking, yet her self-control was perfect, and she readily answeredthe few additional questions which Sherlock Holmes put to her.
"Major Sholto was a very particular friend of papa's," she said. "Hisletters were full of allusions to the major. He and papa were incommand of the troops at the Andaman Islands, so they were thrown agreat deal together. By the way, a curious paper was found in papa'sdesk which no one could understand. I don't suppose that it is of theslightest importance, but I thought you might care to see it, so Ibrought it with me. It is here."
Holmes unfolded the paper carefully and smoothed it out upon hisknee. He then very methodically examined it all over with his doublelens.
"It is paper of native Indian manufacture," he remarked. "It has atsome time been pinned to a board. The diagram upon it appears to be aplan of part of a large building with numerous halls, corridors, andpassages. At one point is a small cross done in red ink, and above itis '3.37 from left,' in faded pencil-writing.  In the left-handcorner is a curious hieroglyphic like four crosses in a line withtheir arms touching. Beside it is written, in very rough and coarsecharacters, 'The sign of the four,--Jonathan Small, Mahomet Singh,Abdullah Khan, Dost Akbar.' No, I confess that I do not see how thisbears upon the matter. Yet it is evidently a document of importance.It has been kept carefully in a pocket-book; for the one side is asclean as the other."
"It was in his pocket-book that we found it."
"Preserve it carefully, then, Miss Morstan, for it may prove to be ofuse to us. I begin to suspect that this matter may turn out to bemuch deeper and more subtle than I at first supposed. I mustreconsider my ideas." He leaned back in the cab, and I could see byhis drawn brow and his vacant eye that he was thinking intently. MissMorstan and I chatted in an undertone about our present expeditionand its possible outcome, but our companion maintained hisimpenetrable reserve until the end of our journey.
It was a September evening, and not yet seven o'clock, but the dayhad been a dreary one, and a dense drizzly fog lay low upon the greatcity. Mud-colored clouds drooped sadly over the muddy streets. Downthe Strand the lamps were but misty splotches of diffused light whichthrew a feeble circular glimmer upon the slimy pavement. The yellowglare from the shop-windows streamed out into the steamy, vaporousair, and threw a murky, shifting radiance across the crowdedthoroughfare. There was, to my mind, something eerie and ghost-likein the endless procession of faces which flitted across these narrowbars of light,--sad faces and glad, haggard and merry. Like all humankind, they flitted from the gloom into the light, and so back intothe gloom once more. I am not subject to impressions, but the dull,heavy evening, with the strange business upon which we were engaged,combined to make me nervous and depressed. I could see from MissMorstan's manner that she was suffering from the same feeling. Holmesalone could rise superior to petty influences. He held his opennote-book upon his knee, and from time to time he jotted down figuresand memoranda in the light of his pocket-lantern.
At the Lyceum Theatre the crowds were already thick at theside-entrances. In front a continuous stream of hansoms andfour-wheelers were rattling up, discharging their cargoes ofshirt-fronted men and beshawled, bediamonded women. We had hardlyreached the third pillar, which was our rendezvous, before a small,dark, brisk man in the dress of a coachman accosted us.
"Are you the parties who come with Miss Morstan?" he asked.
"I am Miss Morstan, and these two gentlemen are my friends," saidshe.
He bent a pair of wonderfully penetrating and questioning eyes uponus. "You will excuse me, miss," he said with a certain dogged manner,"but I was to ask you to give me your word that neither of yourcompanions is a police-officer."
"I give you my word on that," she answered.
He gave a shrill whistle, on which a street Arab led across afour-wheeler and opened the door. The man who had addressed usmounted to the box, while we took our places inside. We had hardlydone so before the driver whipped up his horse, and we plunged awayat a furious pace through the foggy streets.
The situation was a curious one. We were driving to an unknown place,on an unknown errand. Yet our invitation was either a completehoax,--which was an inconceivable hypothesis,--or else we had goodreason to think that important issues might hang upon our journey.Miss Morstan's demeanor was as resolute and collected as ever. Iendeavored to cheer and amuse her by reminiscences of my adventuresin Afghanistan; but, to tell the truth, I was myself so excited atour situation and so curious as to our destination that my storieswere slightly involved. To this day she declares that I told her onemoving anecdote as to how a musket looked into my tent at the dead ofnight, and how I fired a double-barrelled tiger cub at it. At first Ihad some idea as to the direction in which we were driving; but soon,what with our pace, the fog, and my own limited knowledge of London,I lost my bearings, and knew nothing, save that we seemed to be goinga very long way. Sherlock Holmes was never at fault, however, and hemuttered the names as the cab rattled through squares and in and outby tortuous by-streets.
"Rochester Row," said he. "Now Vincent Square. Now we come out on theVauxhall Bridge Road. We are making for the Surrey side, apparently.Yes, I thought so. Now we are on the bridge. You can catch glimpsesof the river."
We did indeed bet a fleeting view of a stretch of the Thames with thelamps shining upon the broad, silent water; but our cab dashed on,and was soon involved in a labyrinth of streets upon the other side.
"Wordsworth Road," said my companion. "Priory Road. Lark Hall Lane.Stockwell Place. Robert Street. Cold Harbor Lane. Our quest does notappear to take us to very fashionable regions."
We had, indeed, reached a questionable and forbidding neighborhood.Long lines of dull brick houses were only relieved by the coarseglare and tawdry brilliancy of public houses at the corner. Then camerows of two-storied villas each with a fronting of miniature garden,and then again interminable lines of new staring brickbuildings,--the monster tentacles which the giant city was throwingout into the country. At last the cab drew up at the third house in anew terrace. None of the other houses were inhabited, and that atwhich we stopped was as dark as its neighbors, save for a singleglimmer in the kitchen window. On our knocking, however, the door wasinstantly thrown open by a Hindoo servant clad in a yellow turban,white loose-fitting clothes, and a yellow sash. There was somethingstrangely incongruous in this Oriental figure framed in thecommonplace door-way of a third-rate suburban dwelling-house.
"The Sahib awaits you," said he, and even as he spoke there came ahigh piping voice from some inner room. "Show them in to me,khitmutgar," it cried. "Show them straight in to me."




     CHAPTER IV     The Story of the Bald-Headed Man

We followed the Indian down a sordid and common passage, ill lit andworse furnished, until he came to a door upon the right, which hethrew open. A blaze of yellow light streamed out upon us, and in thecentre of the glare there stood a small man with a very high head, abristle of red hair all round the fringe of it, and a bald, shiningscalp which shot out from among it like a mountain-peak fromfir-trees. He writhed his hands together as he stood, and hisfeatures were in a perpetual jerk, now smiling, now scowling, butnever for an instant in repose. Nature had given him a pendulous lip,and a too visible line of yellow and irregular teeth, which he strovefeebly to conceal by constantly passing his hand over the lower partof his face. In spite of his obtrusive baldness, he gave theimpression of youth. In point of fact he had just turned histhirtieth year.
"Your servant, Miss Morstan," he kept repeating, in a thin, highvoice. "Your servant, gentlemen. Pray step into my little sanctum. Asmall place, miss, but furnished to my own liking.  An oasis of artin the howling desert of South London."
We were all astonished by the appearance of the apartment into whichhe invited us. In that sorry house it looked as out of place as adiamond of the first water in a setting of brass. The richest andglossiest of curtains and tapestries draped the walls, looped backhere and there to expose some richly-mounted painting or Orientalvase. The carpet was of amber-and-black, so soft and so thick thatthe foot sank pleasantly into it, as into a bed of moss. Two greattiger-skins thrown athwart it increased the suggestion of Easternluxury, as did a huge hookah which stood upon a mat in the corner. Alamp in the fashion of a silver dove was hung from an almostinvisible golden wire in the centre of the room. As it burned itfilled the air with a subtle and aromatic odor.
"Mr. Thaddeus Sholto," said the little man, still jerking andsmiling. "That is my name. You are Miss Morstan, of course. And thesegentlemen--"
"This is Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and this is Dr. Watson."
"A doctor, eh?" cried he, much excited. "Have you your stethoscope?Might I ask you--would you have the kindness? I have grave doubts asto my mitral valve, if you would be so very good. The aortic I mayrely upon, but I should value your opinion upon the mitral."
I listened to his heart, as requested, but was unable to findanything amiss, save indeed that he was in an ecstasy of fear, for heshivered from head to foot. "It appears to be normal," I said. "Youhave no cause for uneasiness."
"You will excuse my anxiety, Miss Morstan," he remarked, airily.  "Iam a great sufferer, and I have long had suspicions as to that valve.I am delighted to hear that they are unwarranted. Had your father,Miss Morstan, refrained from throwing a strain upon his heart, hemight have been alive now."
I could have struck the man across the face, so hot was I at thiscallous and off-hand reference to so delicate a matter. Miss Morstansat down, and her face grew white to the lips. "I knew in my heartthat he was dead," said she.
"I can give you every information," said he, "and, what is more, Ican do you justice; and I will, too, whatever Brother Bartholomew maysay. I am so glad to have your friends here, not only as an escort toyou, but also as witnesses to what I am about to do and say. Thethree of us can show a bold front to Brother Bartholomew. But let ushave no outsiders,--no police or officials. We can settle everythingsatisfactorily among ourselves, without any interference. Nothingwould annoy Brother Bartholomew more than any publicity." He sat downupon a low settee and blinked at us inquiringly with his weak, wateryblue eyes.
"For my part," said Holmes, "whatever you may choose to say will gono further."
I nodded to show my agreement.
"That is well! That is well!" said he. "May I offer you a glass ofChianti, Miss Morstan? Or of Tokay? I keep no other wines. Shall Iopen a flask? No? Well, then, I trust that you have no objection totobacco-smoke, to the mild balsamic odor of the Eastern tobacco. I ama little nervous, and I find my hookah an invaluable sedative." Heapplied a taper to the great bowl, and the smoke bubbled merrilythrough the rose-water. We sat all three in a semicircle, with ourheads advanced, and our chins upon our hands, while the strange,jerky little fellow, with his high, shining head, puffed uneasily inthe centre.
"When I first determined to make this communication to you," said he,"I might have given you my address, but I feared that you mightdisregard my request and bring unpleasant people with you. I took theliberty, therefore, of making an appointment in such a way that myman Williams might be able to see you first. I have completeconfidence in his discretion, and he had orders, if he weredissatisfied, to proceed no further in the matter. You will excusethese precautions, but I am a man of somewhat retiring, and I mighteven say refined, tastes, and there is nothing more unaesthetic thana policeman. I have a natural shrinking from all forms of roughmaterialism. I seldom come in contact with the rough crowd. I live,as you see, with some little atmosphere of elegance around me. I maycall myself a patron of the arts. It is my weakness. The landscape isa genuine Corot, and, though a connoisseur might perhaps throw adoubt upon that Salvator Rosa, there cannot be the least questionabout the Bouguereau. I am partial to the modern French school."
"You will excuse me, Mr. Sholto," said Miss Morstan, "but I am hereat your request to learn something which you desire to tell me. It isvery late, and I should desire the interview to be as short aspossible."
"At the best it must take some time," he answered; "for we shallcertainly have to go to Norwood and see Brother Bartholomew. We shallall go and try if we can get the better of Brother Bartholomew. He isvery angry with me for taking the course which has seemed right tome. I had quite high words with him last night. You cannot imaginewhat a terrible fellow he is when he is angry."
"If we are to go to Norwood it would perhaps be as well to start atonce," I ventured to remark.
He laughed until his ears were quite red. "That would hardly do," hecried. "I don't know what he would say if I brought you in thatsudden way. No, I must prepare you by showing you how we all stand toeach other. In the first place, I must tell you that there areseveral points in the story of which I am myself ignorant. I can onlylay the facts before you as far as I know them myself.
"My father was, as you may have guessed, Major John Sholto, once ofthe Indian army. He retired some eleven years ago, and came to liveat Pondicherry Lodge in Upper Norwood. He had prospered in India, andbrought back with him a considerable sum of money, a large collectionof valuable curiosities, and a staff of native servants. With theseadvantages he bought himself a house, and lived in great luxury. Mytwin-brother Bartholomew and I were the only children.
"I very well remember the sensation which was caused by thedisappearance of Captain Morstan. We read the details in the papers,and, knowing that he had been a friend of our father's, we discussedthe case freely in his presence. He used to join in our speculationsas to what could have happened. Never for an instant did we suspectthat he had the whole secret hidden in his own breast,--that of allmen he alone knew the fate of Arthur Morstan.
"We did know, however, that some mystery--some positivedanger--overhung our father. He was very fearful of going out alone,and he always employed two prize-fighters to act as porters atPondicherry Lodge. Williams, who drove you to-night, was one of them.He was once light-weight champion of England. Our father would nevertell us what it was he feared, but he had a most marked aversion tomen with wooden legs. On one occasion he actually fired his revolverat a wooden-legged man, who proved to be a harmless tradesmancanvassing for orders. We had to pay a large sum to hush the matterup. My brother and I used to think this a mere whim of my father's,but events have since led us to change our opinion.
"Early in 1882 my father received a letter from India which was agreat shock to him. He nearly fainted at the breakfast-table when heopened it, and from that day he sickened to his death. What was inthe letter we could never discover, but I could see as he held itthat it was short and written in a scrawling hand. He had sufferedfor years from an enlarged spleen, but he now became rapidly worse,and towards the end of April we were informed that he was beyond allhope, and that he wished to make a last communication to us.
"When we entered his room he was propped up with pillows andbreathing heavily. He besought us to lock the door and to come uponeither side of the bed. Then, grasping our hands, he made aremarkable statement to us, in a voice which was broken as much byemotion as by pain. I shall try and give it to you in his own verywords.
"'I have only one thing,' he said, 'which weighs upon my mind at thissupreme moment. It is my treatment of poor Morstan's orphan. Thecursed greed which has been my besetting sin through life haswithheld from her the treasure, half at least of which should havebeen hers. And yet I have made no use of it myself,--so blind andfoolish a thing is avarice. The mere feeling of possession has beenso dear to me that I could not bear to share it with another. Seethat chaplet dipped with pearls beside the quinine-bottle. Even thatI could not bear to part with, although I had got it out with thedesign of sending it to her. You, my sons, will give her a fair shareof the Agra treasure. But send her nothing--not even thechaplet--until I am gone. After all, men have been as bad as this andhave recovered.
"'I will tell you how Morstan died,' he continued. 'He had sufferedfor years from a weak heart, but he concealed it from every one. Ialone knew it. When in India, he and I, through a remarkable chain ofcircumstances, came into possession of a considerable treasure. Ibrought it over to England, and on the night of Morstan's arrival hecame straight over here to claim his share. He walked over from thestation, and was admitted by my faithful Lal Chowdar, who is nowdead. Morstan and I had a difference of opinion as to the division ofthe treasure, and we came to heated words. Morstan had sprung out ofhis chair in a paroxysm of anger, when he suddenly pressed his handto his side, his face turned a dusky hue, and he fell backwards,cutting his head against the corner of the treasure-chest. When Istooped over him I found, to my horror, that he was dead.
"'For a long time I sat half distracted, wondering what I should do.My first impulse was, of course, to call for assistance; but I couldnot but recognize that there was every chance that I would be accusedof his murder. His death at the moment of a quarrel, and the gash inhis head, would be black against me. Again, an official inquiry couldnot be made without bringing out some facts about the treasure, whichI was particularly anxious to keep secret. He had told me that nosoul upon earth knew where he had gone. There seemed to be nonecessity why any soul ever should know.
"'I was still pondering over the matter, when, looking up, I saw myservant, Lal Chowdar, in the doorway. He stole in and bolted the doorbehind him. "Do not fear, Sahib," he said. "No one need know that youhave killed him. Let us hide him away, and who is the wiser?" "I didnot kill him," said I. Lal Chowdar shook his head and smiled. "Iheard it all, Sahib," said he. "I heard you quarrel, and I heard theblow. But my lips are sealed. All are asleep in the house. Let us puthim away together." That was enough to decide met. If my own servantcould not believe my innocence, how could I hope to make it goodbefore twelve foolish tradesmen in a jury-box? Lal Chowdar and Idisposed of the body that night, and within a few days the Londonpapers were full of the mysterious disappearance of Captain Morstan.You will see from what I say that I can hardly be blamed in thematter. My fault lies in the fact that we concealed not only thebody, but also the treasure, and that I have clung to Morstan's shareas well as to my own. I wish you, therefore, to make restitution. Putyour ears down to my mouth. The treasure is hidden in--At thisinstant a horrible change came over his expression; his eyes staredwildly, his jaw dropped, and he yelled, in a voice which I can neverforget, 'Keep him out! For Christ's sake keep him out'! We bothstared round at the window behind us upon which his gaze was fixed. Aface was looking in at us out of the darkness. We could see thewhitening of the nose where it was pressed against the glass. It wasa bearded, hairy face, with wild cruel eyes and an expression ofconcentrated malevolence. My brother and I rushed towards the window,but the man was gone. When we returned to my father his head haddropped and his pulse had ceased to beat.
"We searched the garden that night, but found no sign of theintruder, save that just under the window a single footmark wasvisible in the flower-bed. But for that one trace, we might havethought that our imaginations had conjured up that wild, fierce face.We soon, however, had another and a more striking proof that therewere secret agencies at work all round us. The window of my father'sroom was found open in the morning, his cupboards and boxes had beenrifled, and upon his chest was fixed a torn piece of paper, with thewords 'The sign of the four' scrawled across it. What the phrasemeant, or who our secret visitor may have been, we never knew. As faras we can judge, none of my father's property had been actuallystolen, though everything had been turned out. My brother and Inaturally associated this peculiar incident with the fear whichhaunted my father during his life; but it is still a complete mysteryto us."
The little man stopped to relight his hookah and puffed thoughtfullyfor a few moments. We had all sat absorbed, listening to hisextraordinary narrative. At the short account of her father's deathMiss Morstan had turned deadly white, and for a moment I feared thatshe was about to faint. She rallied however, on drinking a glass ofwater which I quietly poured out for her from a Venetian carafe uponthe side-table. Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his chair with anabstracted expression and the lids drawn low over his glitteringeyes. As I glanced at him I could not but think how on that very dayhe had complained bitterly of the commonplaceness of life. Here atleast was a problem which would tax his sagacity to the utmost. Mr.Thaddeus Sholto looked from one to the other of us with an obviouspride at the effect which his story had produced, and then continuedbetween the puffs of his overgrown pipe.
"My brother and I," said he, "were, as you may imagine, much excitedas to the treasure which my father had spoken of. For weeks and formonths we dug and delved in every part of the garden, withoutdiscovering its whereabouts. It was maddening to think that thehiding-place was on his very lips at the moment that he died. Wecould judge the splendor of the missing riches by the chaplet whichhe had taken out. Over this chaplet my brother Bartholomew and I hadsome little discussion. The pearls were evidently of great value, andhe was averse to part with them, for, between friends, my brother washimself a little inclined to my father's fault. He thought, too, thatif we parted with the chaplet it might give rise to gossip andfinally bring us into trouble. It was all that I could do to persuadehim to let me find out Miss Morstan's address and send her a detachedpearl at fixed intervals, so that at least she might never feeldestitute."
"It was a kindly thought," said our companion, earnestly. "It wasextremely good of you."
The little man waved his hand deprecatingly. "We were your trustees,"he said. "That was the view which I took of it, though BrotherBartholomew could not altogether see it in that light. We had plentyof money ourselves. I desired no more. Besides, it would have beensuch bad taste to have treated a young lady in so scurvy a fashion.'Le mauvais got mne au crime.' The French have a very neat way ofputting these things. Our difference of opinion on this subject wentso far that I thought it best to set up rooms for myself: so I leftPondicherry Lodge, taking the old khitmutgar and Williams with me.Yesterday, however, I learn that an event of extreme importance hasoccurred. The treasure has been discovered. I instantly communicatedwith Miss Morstan, and it only remains for us to drive out to Norwoodand demand our share. I explained my views last night to BrotherBartholomew: so we shall be expected, if not welcome, visitors."
Mr. Thaddeus Sholto ceased, and sat twitching on his luxurioussettee. We all remained silent, with our thoughts upon the newdevelopment which the mysterious business had taken. Holmes was thefirst to spring to his feet.
"You have done well, sir, from first to last," said he. "It ispossible that we may be able to make you some small return bythrowing some light upon that which is still dark to you. But, asMiss Morstan remarked just now, it is late, and we had best put thematter through without delay."
Our new acquaintance very deliberately coiled up the tube of hishookah, and produced from behind a curtain a very long befroggedtopcoat with Astrakhan collar and cuffs. This he buttoned tightly up,in spite of the extreme closeness of the night, and finished hisattire by putting on a rabbit-skin cap with hanging lappets whichcovered the ears, so that no part of him was visible save his mobileand peaky face. "My health is somewhat fragile," he remarked, as heled the way down the passage. "I am compelled to be avaletudinarian."
Our cab was awaiting us outside, and our programme was evidentlyprearranged, for the driver started off at once at a rapid pace.Thaddeus Sholto talked incessantly, in a voice which rose high abovethe rattle of the wheels.
"Bartholomew is a clever fellow," said he. "How do you think he foundout where the treasure was? He had come to the conclusion that it wassomewhere indoors: so he worked out all the cubic space of the house,and made measurements everywhere, so that not one inch should beunaccounted for. Among other things, he found that the height of thebuilding was seventy-four feet, but on adding together the heights ofall the separate rooms, and making every allowance for the spacebetween, which he ascertained by borings, he could not bring thetotal to more than seventy feet. There were four feet unaccountedfor. These could only be at the top of the building. He knocked ahole, therefore, in the lath-and-plaster ceiling of the highest room,and there, sure enough, he came upon another little garret above it,which had been sealed up and was known to no one. In the centre stoodthe treasure-chest, resting upon two rafters. He lowered it throughthe hole, and there it lies. He computes the value of the jewels atnot less than half a million sterling."
At the mention of this gigantic sum we all stared at one anotheropen-eyed. Miss Morstan, could we secure her rights, would changefrom a needy governess to the richest heiress in England. Surely itwas the place of a loyal friend to rejoice at such news; yet I amashamed to say that selfishness took me by the soul, and that myheart turned as heavy as lead within me. I stammered out some fewhalting words of congratulation, and then sat downcast, with my headdrooped, deaf to the babble of our new acquaintance. He was clearly aconfirmed hypochondriac, and I was dreamily conscious that he waspouring forth interminable trains of symptoms, and imploringinformation as to the composition and action of innumerable quacknostrums, some of which he bore about in a leather case in hispocket. I trust that he may not remember any of the answers which Igave him that night. Holmes declares that he overheard me caution himagainst the great danger of taking more than two drops of castor oil,while I recommended strychnine in large doses as a sedative. Howeverthat may be, I was certainly relieved when our cab pulled up with ajerk and the coachman sprang down to open the door.
"This, Miss Morstan, is Pondicherry Lodge," said Mr. Thaddeus Sholto,as he handed her out.




     CHAPTER V     The Tragedy of Pondicherry Lodge

It was nearly eleven o'clock when we reached this final stage of ournight's adventures. We had left the damp fog of the great city behindus, and the night was fairly fine. A warm wind blew from thewestward, and heavy clouds moved slowly across the sky, with half amoon peeping occasionally through the rifts. It was clear enough tosee for some distance, but Thaddeus Sholto took down one of theside-lamps from the carriage to give us a better light upon our way.
Pondicherry Lodge stood in its own grounds, and was girt round with avery high stone wall topped with broken glass. A single narrowiron-clamped door formed the only means of entrance. On this ourguide knocked with a peculiar postman-like rat-tat.
"Who is there?" cried a gruff voice from within.
"It is I, McMurdo. You surely know my knock by this time."
There was a grumbling sound and a clanking and jarring of keys. Thedoor swung heavily back, and a short, deep-chested man stood in theopening, with the yellow light of the lantern shining upon hisprotruded face and twinkling distrustful eyes.
"That you, Mr. Thaddeus? But who are the others? I had no ordersabout them from the master."
"No, McMurdo? You surprise me! I told my brother last night that Ishould bring some friends.
"He ain't been out o' his room to-day, Mr. Thaddeus, and I have noorders. You know very well that I must stick to regulations. I canlet you in, but your friends must just stop where they are."
This was an unexpected obstacle. Thaddeus Sholto looked about him ina perplexed and helpless manner. "This is too bad of you, McMurdo!"he said. "If I guarantee them, that is enough for you. There is theyoung lady, too. She cannot wait on the public road at this hour."
"Very sorry, Mr. Thaddeus," said the porter, inexorably. "Folk may befriends o' yours, and yet no friends o' the master's. He pays me wellto do my duty, and my duty I'll do. I don't know none o' yourfriends."
"Oh, yes you do, McMurdo," cried Sherlock Holmes, genially. "I don'tthink you can have forgotten me. Don't you remember the amateur whofought three rounds with you at Alison's rooms on the night of yourbenefit four years back?"
"Not Mr. Sherlock Holmes!" roared the prize-fighter. "God's truth!how could I have mistook you? If instead o' standin' there so quietyou had just stepped up and given me that cross-hit of yours underthe jaw, I'd ha' known you without a question. Ah, you're one thathas wasted your gifts, you have! You might have aimed high, if youhad joined the fancy."
"You see, Watson, if all else fails me I have still one of thescientific professions open to me," said Holmes, laughing. "Ourfriend won't keep us out in the cold now, I am sure."
"In you come, sir, in you come,--you and your friends," he answered."Very sorry, Mr. Thaddeus, but orders are very strict. Had to becertain of your friends before I let them in."
Inside, a gravel path wound through desolate grounds to a huge clumpof a house, square and prosaic, all plunged in shadow save where amoonbeam struck one corner and glimmered in a garret window. The vastsize of the building, with its gloom and its deathly silence, strucka chill to the heart. Even Thaddeus Sholto seemed ill at ease, andthe lantern quivered and rattled in his hand.
"I cannot understand it," he said. "There must be some mistake. Idistinctly told Bartholomew that we should be here, and yet there isno light in his window. I do not know what to make of it."
"Does he always guard the premises in this way?" asked Holmes.
"Yes; he has followed my father's custom. He was the favorite son,you know, and I sometimes think that my father may have told him morethan he ever told me. That is Bartholomew's window up there where themoonshine strikes. It is quite bright, but there is no light fromwithin, I think."
"None," said Holmes. "But I see the glint of a light in that littlewindow beside the door."
"Ah, that is the housekeeper's room. That is where old Mrs. Bernstonesits. She can tell us all about it. But perhaps you would not mindwaiting here for a minute or two, for if we all go in together andshe has no word of our coming she may be alarmed. But hush! what isthat?"
He held up the lantern, and his hand shook until the circles of lightflickered and wavered all round us. Miss Morstan seized my wrist, andwe all stood with thumping hearts, straining our ears. From the greatblack house there sounded through the silent night the saddest andmost pitiful of sounds,--the shrill, broken whimpering of afrightened woman.
"It is Mrs. Bernstone," said Sholto. "She is the only woman in thehouse. Wait here. I shall be back in a moment." He hurried for thedoor, and knocked in his peculiar way. We could see a tall old womanadmit him, and sway with pleasure at the very sight of him.
"Oh, Mr. Thaddeus, sir, I am so glad you have come! I am so glad youhave come, Mr. Thaddeus, sir!" We heard her reiterated rejoicingsuntil the door was closed and her voice died away into a muffledmonotone.
Our guide had left us the lantern. Holmes swung it slowly round, andpeered keenly at the house, and at the great rubbish-heaps whichcumbered the grounds. Miss Morstan and I stood together, and her handwas in mine. A wondrous subtle thing is love, for here were we twowho had never seen each other before that day, between whom no wordor even look of affection had ever passed, and yet now in an hour oftrouble our hands instinctively sought for each other. I havemarvelled at it since, but at the time it seemed the most naturalthing that I should go out to her so, and, as she has often told me,there was in her also the instinct to turn to me for comfort andprotection. So we stood hand in hand, like two children, and therewas peace in our hearts for all the dark things that surrounded us.
"What a strange place!" she said, looking round.
"It looks as though all the moles in England had been let loose init. I have seen something of the sort on the side of a hill nearBallarat, where the prospectors had been at work."
"And from the same cause," said Holmes. "These are the traces of thetreasure-seekers. You must remember that they were six years lookingfor it. No wonder that the grounds look like a gravel-pit."
At that moment the door of the house burst open, and Thaddeus Sholtocame running out, with his hands thrown forward and terror in hiseyes.
"There is something amiss with Bartholomew!" he cried. "I amfrightened! My nerves cannot stand it." He was, indeed, halfblubbering with fear, and his twitching feeble face peeping out fromthe great Astrakhan collar had the helpless appealing expression of aterrified child.
"Come into the house," said Holmes, in his crisp, firm way.
"Yes, do!" pleaded Thaddeus Sholto. "I really do not feel equal togiving directions."
We all followed him into the housekeeper's room, which stood upon theleft-hand side of the passage. The old woman was pacing up and downwith a scared look and restless picking fingers, but the sight ofMiss Morstan appeared to have a soothing effect upon her.
"God bless your sweet calm face!" she cried, with an hysterical sob."It does me good to see you. Oh, but I have been sorely tried thisday!"
Our companion patted her thin, work-worn hand, and murmured some fewwords of kindly womanly comfort which brought the color back into theothers bloodless cheeks.
"Master has locked himself in and will now answer me," she explained."All day I have waited to hear from him, for he often likes to bealone; but an hour ago I feared that something was amiss, so I wentup and peeped through the key-hole. You must go up, Mr.Thaddeus,--you must go up and look for yourself. I have seen Mr.Bartholomew Sholto in joy and in sorrow for ten long years, but Inever saw him with such a face on him as that."
Sherlock Holmes took the lamp and led the way, for Thaddeus Sholto'steeth were chattering in his head. So shaken was he that I had topass my hand under his arm as we went up the stairs, for his kneeswere trembling under him. Twice as we ascended Holmes whipped hislens out of his pocket and carefully examined marks which appeared tome to be mere shapeless smudges of dust upon the cocoa-nut mattingwhich served as a stair-carpet. He walked slowly from step to step,holding the lamp, and shooting keen glances to right and left. MissMorstan had remained behind with the frightened housekeeper.
The third flight of stairs ended in a straight passage of somelength, with a great picture in Indian tapestry upon the right of itand three doors upon the left. Holmes advanced along it in the sameslow and methodical way, while we kept close at his heels, with ourlong black shadows streaming backwards down the corridor. The thirddoor was that which we were seeking. Holmes knocked without receivingany answer, and then tried to turn the handle and force it open. Itwas locked on the inside, however, and by a broad and powerful bolt,as we could see when we set our lamp up against it. The key beingturned, however, the hole was not entirely closed. Sherlock Holmesbent down to it, and instantly rose again with a sharp intaking ofthe breath.
"There is something devilish in this, Watson," said he, more movedthan I had ever before seen him. "What do you make of it?"
I stooped to the hole, and recoiled in horror. Moonlight wasstreaming into the room, and it was bright with a vague and shiftyradiance. Looking straight at me, and suspended, as it were, in theair, for all beneath was in shadow, there hung a face,--the very faceof our companion Thaddeus. There was the same high, shining head, thesame circular bristle of red hair, the same bloodless countenance.The features were set, however, in a horrible smile, a fixed andunnatural grin, which in that still and moonlit room was more jarringto the nerves than any scowl or contortion. So like was the face tothat of our little friend that I looked round at him to make surethat he was indeed with us. Then I recalled to mind that he hadmentioned to us that his brother and he were twins.
"This is terrible!" I said to Holmes. "What is to be done?"
"The door must come down," he answered, and, springing against it, heput all his weight upon the lock. It creaked and groaned, but did notyield. Together we flung ourselves upon it once more, and this timeit gave way with a sudden snap, and we found ourselves withinBartholomew Sholto's chamber.
It appeared to have been fitted up as a chemical laboratory. A doubleline of glass-stoppered bottles was drawn up upon the wall oppositethe door, and the table was littered over with Bunsen burners,test-tubes, and retorts. In the corners stood carboys of acid inwicker baskets. One of these appeared to leak or to have been broken,for a stream of dark-colored liquid had trickled out from it, and theair was heavy with a peculiarly pungent, tar-like odor. A set ofsteps stood at one side of the room, in the midst of a litter of lathand plaster, and above them there was an opening in the ceiling largeenough for a man to pass through. At the foot of the steps a longcoil of rope was thrown carelessly together.
By the table, in a wooden arm-chair, the master of the house wasseated all in a heap, with his head sunk upon his left shoulder, andthat ghastly, inscrutable smile upon his face. He was stiff and cold,and had clearly been dead many hours. It seemed to me that not onlyhis features but all his limbs were twisted and turned in the mostfantastic fashion. By his hand upon the table there lay a peculiarinstrument,--a brown, close-grained stick, with a stone head like ahammer, rudely lashed on with coarse twine. Beside it was a tornsheet of note-paper with some words scrawled upon it. Holmes glancedat it, and then handed it to me.
"You see," he said, with a significant raising of the eyebrows.
In the light of the lantern I read, with a thrill of horror, "Thesign of the four."
"In God's name, what does it all mean?" I asked.
"It means murder," said he, stooping over the dead man. "Ah, Iexpected it. Look here!" He pointed to what looked like a long, darkthorn stuck in the skin just above the ear.
"It looks like a thorn," said I.
"It is a thorn. You may pick it out. But be careful, for it ispoisoned."
I took it up between my finger and thumb. It came away from the skinso readily that hardly any mark was left behind. One tiny speck ofblood showed where the puncture had been.
"This is all an insoluble mystery to me," said I. "It grows darkerinstead of clearer."
"On the contrary," he answered, "it clears every instant. I onlyrequire a few missing links to have an entirely connected case."
We had almost forgotten our companion's presence since we entered thechamber. He was still standing in the door-way, the very picture ofterror, wringing his hands and moaning to himself. Suddenly, however,he broke out into a sharp, querulous cry.
"The treasure is gone!" he said. "They have robbed him of thetreasure! There is the hole through which we lowered it. I helped himto do it! I was the last person who saw him! I left him here lastnight, and I heard him lock the door as I came down-stairs."
"What time was that?"
"It was ten o'clock. And now he is dead, and the police will becalled in, and I shall be suspected of having had a hand in it. Oh,yes, I am sure I shall. But you don't think so, gentlemen? Surely youdon't think that it was I? Is it likely that I would have brought youhere if it were I? Oh, dear! oh, dear! I know that I shall go mad!"He jerked his arms and stamped his feet in a kind of convulsivefrenzy.
"You have no reason for fear, Mr. Sholto," said Holmes, kindly,putting his hand upon his shoulder. "Take my advice, and drive downto the station to report this matter to the police. Offer to assistthem in every way. We shall wait here until your return."
The little man obeyed in a half-stupefied fashion, and we heard himstumbling down the stairs in the dark.




     CHAPTER VI     Sherlock Holmes Gives a Demonstration

"Now, Watson," said Holmes, rubbing his hands, "we have half an hourto ourselves. Let us make good use of it. My case is, as I have toldyou, almost complete; but we must not err on the side ofover-confidence. Simple as the case seems now, there may be somethingdeeper underlying it."
"Simple!" I ejaculated.
"Surely," said he, with something of the air of a clinical professorexpounding to his class. "Just sit in the corner there, that yourfootprints may not complicate matters. Now to work! In the firstplace, how did these folk come, and how did they go? The door has notbeen opened since last night. How of the window?" He carried the lampacross to it, muttering his observations aloud the while, butaddressing them to himself rather than to me. "Window is snibbed onthe inner side. Framework is solid. No hinges at the side. Let usopen it. No water-pipe near. Roof quite out of reach. Yet a man hasmounted by the window. It rained a little last night. Here is theprint of a foot in mould upon the sill. And here is a circular muddymark, and here again upon the floor, and here again by the table. Seehere, Watson! This is really a very pretty demonstration."
I looked at the round, well-defined muddy discs. "This is not afootmark," said I.
"It is something much more valuable to us. It is the impression of awooden stump. You see here on the sill is the boot-mark, a heavy bootwith the broad metal heel, and beside it is the mark of thetimber-toe."
"It is the wooden-legged man."
"Quite so. But there has been some one else,--a very able andefficient ally. Could you scale that wall, doctor?"
I looked out of the open window. The moon still shone brightly onthat angle of the house. We were a good sixty feet from the ground,and, look where I would, I could see no foothold, nor as much as acrevice in the brick-work.
"It is absolutely impossible," I answered.
"Without aid it is so. But suppose you had a friend up here wholowered you this good stout rope which I see in the corner, securingone end of it to this great hook in the wall. Then, I think, if youwere an active man, you might swarm up, wooden leg and all. You woulddepart, of course, in the same fashion, and your ally would draw upthe rope, untie it from the hook, shut the window, snib it on theinside, and get away in the way that he originally came. As a minorpoint it may be noted," he continued, fingering the rope, "that ourwooden-legged friend, though a fair climber, was not a professionalsailor. His hands were far from horny. My lens discloses more thanone blood-mark, especially towards the end of the rope, from which Igather that he slipped down with such velocity that he took the skinoff his hand."
"This is all very well," said I, "but the thing becomes moreunintelligible than ever. How about this mysterious ally? How came heinto the room?"
"Yes, the ally!" repeated Holmes, pensively. "There are features ofinterest about this ally. He lifts the case from the regions of thecommonplace. I fancy that this ally breaks fresh ground in the annalsof crime in this country,--though parallel cases suggest themselvesfrom India, and, if my memory serves me, from Senegambia."
"How came he, then?" I reiterated. "The door is locked, the window isinaccessible. Was it through the chimney?"
"The grate is much too small," he answered. "I had already consideredthat possibility."
"How then?" I persisted.
"You will not apply my precept," he said, shaking his head. "Howoften have I said to you that when you have eliminated the impossiblewhatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth? We know thathe did not come through the door, the window, or the chimney. We alsoknow that he could not have been concealed in the room, as there isno concealment possible. Whence, then, did he come?"
"He came through the hole in the roof," I cried.
"Of course he did. He must have done so. If you will have thekindness to hold the lamp for me, we shall now extend our researchesto the room above,--the secret room in which the treasure was found."
He mounted the steps, and, seizing a rafter with either hand, heswung himself up into the garret. Then, lying on his face, he reacheddown for the lamp and held it while I followed him.
The chamber in which we found ourselves was about ten feet one wayand six the other. The floor was formed by the rafters, with thinlath-and-plaster between, so that in walking one had to step frombeam to beam. The roof ran up to an apex, and was evidently the innershell of the true roof of the house. There was no furniture of anysort, and the accumulated dust of years lay thick upon the floor.
"Here you are, you see," said Sherlock Holmes, putting his handagainst the sloping wall. "This is a trap-door which leads out on tothe roof. I can press it back, and here is the roof itself, slopingat a gentle angle. This, then, is the way by which Number Oneentered. Let us see if we can find one other traces of hisindividuality."
He held down the lamp to the floor, and as he did so I saw for thesecond time that night a startled, surprised look come over his face.For myself, as I followed his gaze my skin was cold under my clothes.The floor was covered thickly with the prints of a nakedfoot,--clear, well defined, perfectly formed, but scarce half thesize of those of an ordinary man.
"Holmes," I said, in a whisper, "a child has done the horrid thing."
He had recovered his self-possession in an instant. "I was staggeredfor the moment," he said, "but the thing is quite natural. My memoryfailed me, or I should have been able to foretell it. There isnothing more to be learned here. Let us go down."
"What is your theory, then, as to those footmarks?" I asked, eagerly,when we had regained the lower room once more.
"My dear Watson, try a little analysis yourself," said he, with atouch of impatience. "You know my methods. Apply them, and it will beinstructive to compare results."
"I cannot conceive anything which will cover the facts," I answered.
"It will be clear enough to you soon," he said, in an off-hand way."I think that there is nothing else of importance here, but I willlook." He whipped out his lens and a tape measure, and hurried aboutthe room on his knees, measuring, comparing, examining, with his longthin nose only a few inches from the planks, and his beady eyesgleaming and deep-set like those of a bird. So swift, silent, andfurtive were his movements, like those of a trained blood-houndpicking out a scent, that I could not but think what a terriblecriminal he would have made had he turned his energy and sagacityagainst the law, instead of exerting them in its defense. As hehunted about, he kept muttering to himself, and finally he broke outinto a loud crow of delight.
"We are certainly in luck," said he. "We ought to have very littletrouble now. Number One has had the misfortune to tread in thecreosote. You can see the outline of the edge of his small foot hereat the side of this evil-smelling mess. The carboy has been cracked,You see, and the stuff has leaked out."
"What then?" I asked.
"Why, we have got him, that's all," said he. "I know a dog that wouldfollow that scent to the world's end. If a pack can track a trailedherring across a shire, how far can a specially-trained hound followso pungent a smell as this? It sounds like a sum in the rule ofthree. The answer should give us the--But halloo! here are theaccredited representatives of the law."
Heavy steps and the clamor of loud voices were audible from below,and the hall door shut with a loud crash.
"Before they come," said Holmes, "just put your hand here on thispoor fellow's arm, and here on his leg. What do you feel?"
"The muscles are as hard as a board," I answered.
"Quite so. They are in a state of extreme contraction, far exceedingthe usual rigor mortis. Coupled with this distortion of the face,this Hippocratic smile, or 'risus sardonicus,' as the old writerscalled it, what conclusion would it suggest to your mind?"
"Death from some powerful vegetable alkaloid," I answered,--"somestrychnine-like substance which would produce tetanus."
"That was the idea which occurred to me the instant I saw the drawnmuscles of the face. On getting into the room I at once looked forthe means by which the poison had entered the system. As you saw, Idiscovered a thorn which had been driven or shot with no great forceinto the scalp. You observe that the part struck was that which wouldbe turned towards the hole in the ceiling if the man were erect inhis chair. Now examine the thorn."
I took it up gingerly and held it in the light of the lantern. It waslong, sharp, and black, with a glazed look near the point as thoughsome gummy substance had dried upon it. The blunt end had beentrimmed and rounded off with a knife.
"Is that an English thorn?" he asked.
"No, it certainly is not."
"With all these data you should be able to draw some just inference.But here are the regulars: so the auxiliary forces may beat aretreat."
As he spoke, the steps which had been coming nearer sounded loudly onthe passage, and a very stout, portly man in a gray suit strodeheavily into the room. He was red-faced, burly and plethoric, with apair of very small twinkling eyes which looked keenly out frombetween swollen and puffy pouches. He was closely followed by aninspector in uniform, and by the still palpitating Thaddeus Sholto.
"Here's a business!" he cried, in a muffled, husky voice. "Here's apretty business! But who are all these? Why, the house seems to be asfull as a rabbit-warren!"
"I think you must recollect me, Mr. Athelney Jones," said Holmes,quietly.
"Why, of course I do!" he wheezed. "It's Mr. Sherlock Holmes, thetheorist. Remember you! I'll never forget how you lectured us all oncauses and inferences and effects in the Bishopgate jewel case. It'strue you set us on the right track; but you'll own now that it wasmore by good luck than good guidance."
"It was a piece of very simple reasoning."
"Oh, come, now, come! Never be ashamed to own up. But what is allthis? Bad business! Bad business! Stern facts here,--no room fortheories. How lucky that I happened to be out at Norwood over anothercase! I was at the station when the message arrived. What d'you thinkthe man died of?"
"Oh, this is hardly a case for me to theorize over," said Holmes,dryly.
"No, no. Still, we can't deny that you hit the nail on the headsometimes. Dear me! Door locked, I understand. Jewels worth half amillion missing. How was the window?"
"Fastened; but there are steps on the sill."
"Well, well, if it was fastened the steps could have nothing to dowith the matter. That's common sense. Man might have died in a fit;but then the jewels are missing. Ha! I have a theory. These flashescome upon me at times.--Just step outside, sergeant, and you, Mr.Sholto. Your friend can remain.--What do you think of this, Holmes?Sholto was, on his own confession, with his brother last night. Thebrother died in a fit, on which Sholto walked off with the treasure.How's that?"
"On which the dead man very considerately got up and locked the dooron the inside."
"Hum! There's a flaw there. Let us apply common sense to the matter.This Thaddeus Sholto was with his brother; there was a quarrel; somuch we know. The brother is dead and the jewels are gone. So muchalso we know. No one saw the brother from the time Thaddeus left him.His bed had not been slept in. Thaddeus is evidently in a mostdisturbed state of mind. His appearance is--well, not attractive. Yousee that I am weaving my web round Thaddeus. The net begins to closeupon him."
"You are not quite in possession of the facts yet," said Holmes."This splinter of wood, which I have every reason to believe to bepoisoned, was in the man's scalp where you still see the mark; thiscard, inscribed as you see it, was on the table; and beside it laythis rather curious stone-headed instrument. How does all that fitinto your theory?"
"Confirms it in every respect," said the fat detective, pompously."House is full of Indian curiosities. Thaddeus brought this up, andif this splinter be poisonous Thaddeus may as well have mademurderous use of it as any other man. The card is somehocus-pocus,--a blind, as like as not. The only question is, how didhe depart? Ah, of course, here is a hole in the roof." With greatactivity, considering his bulk, he sprang up the steps and squeezedthrough into the garret, and immediately afterwards we heard hisexulting voice proclaiming that he had found the trap-door.
"He can find something," remarked Holmes, shrugging his shoulders."He has occasional glimmerings of reason. Il n'y a pas des sots siincommodes que ceux qui ont de l'esprit!"
"You see!" said Athelney Jones, reappearing down the steps again."Facts are better than mere theories, after all. My view of the caseis confirmed. There is a trap-door communicating with the roof, andit is partly open."
"It was I who opened it."
"Oh, indeed! You did notice it, then?" He seemed a little crestfallenat the discovery. "Well, whoever noticed it, it shows how ourgentleman got away. Inspector!"
"Yes, sir," from the passage.
"Ask Mr. Sholto to step this way.--Mr. Sholto, it is my duty toinform you that anything which you may say will be used against you.I arrest you in the Queen's name as being concerned in the death ofyour brother."
"There, now! Didn't I tell you!" cried the poor little man, throwingout his hands, and looking from one to the other of us.
"Don't trouble yourself about it, Mr. Sholto," said Holmes. "I thinkthat I can engage to clear you of the charge."
"Don't promise too much, Mr. Theorist,--don't promise too much!"snapped the detective. "You may find it a harder matter than youthink."
"Not only will I clear him, Mr. Jones, but I will make you a freepresent of the name and description of one of the two people who werein this room last night. His name, I have every reason to believe, isJonathan Small. He is a poorly-educated man, small, active, with hisright leg off, and wearing a wooden stump which is worn away upon theinner side. His left boot has a coarse, square-toed sole, with aniron band round the heel. He is a middle-aged man, much sunburned,and has been a convict. These few indications may be of someassistance to you, coupled with the fact that there is a good deal ofskin missing from the palm of his hand. The other man--"
"Ah! the other man--?" asked Athelney Jones, in a sneering voice, butimpressed none the less, as I could easily see, by the precision ofthe other's manner.
"Is a rather curious person," said Sherlock Holmes, turning upon hisheel. "I hope before very long to be able to introduce you to thepair of them. A word with you, Watson."
He led me out to the head of the stair. "This unexpected occurrence,"he said, "has caused us rather to lose sight of the original purposeof our journey."
"I have just been thinking so," I answered. "It is not right thatMiss Morstan should remain in this stricken house."
"No. You must escort her home. She lives with Mrs. Cecil Forrester,in Lower Camberwell: so it is not very far. I will wait for you hereif you will drive out again. Or perhaps you are too tired?"
"By no means. I don't think I could rest until I know more of thisfantastic business. I have seen something of the rough side of life,but I give you my word that this quick succession of strangesurprises to-night has shaken my nerve completely. I should like,however, to see the matter through with you, now that I have got sofar."
"Your presence will be of great service to me," he answered. "Weshall work the case out independently, and leave this fellow Jones toexult over any mare's-nest which he may choose to construct. When youhave dropped Miss Morstan I wish you to go on to No. 3 Pinchin Lane,down near the water's edge at Lambeth. The third house on theright-hand side is a bird-stuffer's: Sherman is the name. You willsee a weasel holding a young rabbit in the window. Knock old Shermanup, and tell him, with my compliments, that I want Toby at once. Youwill bring Toby back in the cab with you."
"A dog, I suppose."
"Yes,--a queer mongrel, with a most amazing power of scent. I wouldrather have Toby's help than that of the whole detective force ofLondon."
"I shall bring him, then," said I. "It is one now. I ought to be backbefore three, if I can get a fresh horse."
"And I," said Holmes, "shall see what I can learn from Mrs.Bernstone, and from the Indian servant, who, Mr. Thaddeus tell me,sleeps in the next garret. Then I shall study the great Jones'smethods and listen to his not too delicate sarcasms. 'Wir sindgewohnt, da die Menschen verhhnen was sie nicht verstehen.' Goetheis always pithy."




     CHAPTER VII     The Episode of the Barrel

The police had brought a cab with them, and in this I escorted MissMorstan back to her home. After the angelic fashion of women, she hadborne trouble with a calm face as long as there was some one weakerthan herself to support, and I had found her bright and placid by theside of the frightened housekeeper. In the cab, however, she firstturned faint, and then burst into a passion of weeping,--so sorelyhad she been tried by the adventures of the night. She has told mesince that she thought me cold and distant upon that journey. Shelittle guessed the struggle within my breast, or the effort ofself-restraint which held me back. My sympathies and my love went outto her, even as my hand had in the garden. I felt that years of theconventionalities of life could not teach me to know her sweet, bravenature as had this one day of strange experiences. Yet there were twothoughts which sealed the words of affection upon my lips. She wasweak and helpless, shaken in mind and nerve. It was to take her at adisadvantage to obtrude love upon her at such a time. Worse still,she was rich. If Holmes's researches were successful, she would be anheiress. Was it fair, was it honorable, that a half-pay surgeonshould take such advantage of an intimacy which chance had broughtabout? Might she not look upon me as a mere vulgar fortune-seeker? Icould not bear to risk that such a thought should cross her mind.This Agra treasure intervened like an impassable barrier between us.
It was nearly two o'clock when we reached Mrs. Cecil Forrester's. Theservants had retired hours ago, but Mrs. Forrester had been sointerested by the strange message which Miss Morstan had receivedthat she had sat up in the hope of her return. She opened the doorherself, a middle-aged, graceful woman, and it gave me joy to see howtenderly her arm stole round the other's waist and how motherly wasthe voice in which she greeted her. She was clearly no mere paiddependant, but an honored friend. I was introduced, and Mrs.Forrester earnestly begged me to step in and tell her our adventures.I explained, however, the importance of my errand, and promisedfaithfully to call and report any progress which we might make withthe case. As we drove away I stole a glance back, and I still seem tosee that little group on the step, the two graceful, clingingfigures, the half-opened door, the hall light shining through stainedglass, the barometer, and the bright stair-rods. It was soothing tocatch even that passing glimpse of a tranquil English home in themidst of the wild, dark business which had absorbed us.
And the more I thought of what had happened, the wilder and darker itgrew. I reviewed the whole extraordinary sequence of events as Irattled on through the silent gas-lit streets. There was the originalproblem: that at least was pretty clear now. The death of CaptainMorstan, the sending of the pearls, the advertisement, theletter,--we had had light upon all those events. They had only ledus, however, to a deeper and far more tragic mystery. The Indiantreasure, the curious plan found among Morstan's baggage, the strangescene at Major Sholto's death, the rediscovery of the treasureimmediately followed by the murder of the discoverer, the verysingular accompaniments to the crime, the footsteps, the remarkableweapons, the words upon the card, corresponding with those uponCaptain Morstan's chart,--here was indeed a labyrinth in which a manless singularly endowed than my fellow-lodger might well despair ofever finding the clue.
Pinchin Lane was a row of shabby two-storied brick houses in thelower quarter of Lambeth. I had to knock for some time at No. 3before I could make my impression. At last, however, there was theglint of a candle behind the blind, and a face looked out at theupper window.
"Go on, you drunken vagabone," said the face. "If you kick up anymore row I'll open the kennels and let out forty-three dogs uponyou."
"If you'll let one out it's just what I have come for," said I.
"Go on!" yelled the voice. "So help me gracious, I have a wiper inthe bag, an' I'll drop it on your 'ead if you don't hook it."
"But I want a dog," I cried.
"I won't be argued with!" shouted Mr. Sherman. "Now stand clear, forwhen I say 'three,' down goes the wiper."
"Mr. Sherlock Holmes--" I began, but the words had a most magicaleffect, for the window instantly slammed down, and within a minutethe door was unbarred and open. Mr. Sherman was a lanky, lean oldman, with stooping shoulders, a stringy neck, and blue-tintedglasses.
"A friend of Mr. Sherlock is always welcome," said he.  "Step in,sir. Keep clear of the badger; for he bites. Ah, naughty, naughty,would you take a nip at the gentleman?" This to a stoat which thrustits wicked head and red eyes between the bars of its cage. "Don'tmind that, sir: it's only a slow-worm. It hain't got no fangs, so Igives it the run o' the room, for it keeps the bettles down. You mustnot mind my bein' just a little short wi' you at first, for I'm guyedat by the children, and there's many a one just comes down this laneto knock me up. What was it that Mr. Sherlock Holmes wanted, sir?"
"He wanted a dog of yours."
"Ah! that would be Toby."
"Yes, Toby was the name."
"Toby lives at No. 7 on the left here." He moved slowly forward withhis candle among the queer animal family which he had gathered roundhim. In the uncertain, shadowy light I could see dimly that therewere glancing, glimmering eyes peeping down at us from every crannyand corner. Even the rafters above our heads were lined by solemnfowls, who lazily shifted their weight from one leg to the other asour voices disturbed their slumbers.
Toby proved to an ugly, long-haired, lop-eared creature, half spanieland half lurcher, brown-and-white in color, with a very clumsywaddling gait. It accepted after some hesitation a lump of sugarwhich the old naturalist handed to me, and, having thus sealed analliance, it followed me to the cab, and made no difficulties aboutaccompanying me. It had just struck three on the Palace clock when Ifound myself back once more at Pondicherry Lodge. Theex-prize-fighter McMurdo had, I found, been arrested as an accessory,and both he and Mr. Sholto had been marched off to the station. Twoconstables guarded the narrow gate, but they allowed me to pass withthe dog on my mentioning the detective's name.
Holmes was standing on the door-step, with his hands in his pockets,smoking his pipe.
"Ah, you have him there!" said he. "Good dog, then! Athelney Joneshas gone. We have had an immense display of energy since you left. Hehas arrested not only friend Thaddeus, but the gatekeeper, thehousekeeper, and the Indian servant. We have the place to ourselves,but for a sergeant up-stairs. Leave the dog here, and come up."
We tied Toby to the hall table, and reascended the stairs. The roomwas as we had left it, save that a sheet had been draped over thecentral figure. A weary-looking police-sergeant reclined in thecorner.
"Lend me your bull's-eye, sergeant," said my companion. "Now tie thisbit of card round my neck, so as to hang it in front of me. Thankyou. Now I must kick off my boots and stockings.--Just you carry themdown with you, Watson. I am going to do a little climbing. And dip myhandkerchief into the creasote. That will do. Now come up into thegarret with me for a moment."
We clambered up through the hole. Holmes turned his light once moreupon the footsteps in the dust.
"I wish you particularly to notice these footmarks," he said. "Do youobserve anything noteworthy about them?"
"They belong," I said, "to a child or a small woman."
"Apart from their size, though. Is there nothing else?"
"They appear to be much as other footmarks."
"Not at all. Look here! This is the print of a right foot in thedust. Now I make one with my naked foot beside it. What is the chiefdifference?"
"Your toes are all cramped together. The other print has each toedistinctly divided."
"Quite so. That is the point. Bear that in mind. Now, would youkindly step over to that flap-window and smell the edge of thewood-work? I shall stay here, as I have this handkerchief in myhand."
I did as he directed, and was instantly conscious of a strong tarrysmell.
"That is where he put his foot in getting out. If you can trace him,I should think that Toby will have no difficulty. Now rundown-stairs, loose the dog, and look out for Blondin."
By the time that I got out into the grounds Sherlock Holmes was onthe roof, and I could see him like an enormous glow-worm crawlingvery slowly along the ridge. I lost sight of him behind a stack ofchimneys, but he presently reappeared, and then vanished once moreupon the opposite side. When I made my way round there I found himseated at one of the corner eaves.
"That You, Watson?" he cried.
"Yes."
"This is the place. What is that black thing down there?"
"A water-barrel."
"Top on it?"
"Yes."
"No sign of a ladder?"
"No."
"Confound the fellow! It's a most break-neck place. I ought to beable to come down where he could climb up. The water-pipe feelspretty firm. Here goes, anyhow."
There was a scuffling of feet, and the lantern began to come steadilydown the side of the wall. Then with a light spring he came on to thebarrel, and from there to the earth.
"It was easy to follow him," he said, drawing on his stockings andboots. "Tiles were loosened the whole way along, and in his hurry hehad dropped this. It confirms my diagnosis, as you doctors expressit."
The object which he held up to me was a small pocket or pouch wovenout of colored grasses and with a few tawdry beads strung round it.In shape and size it was not unlike a cigarette-case. Inside werehalf a dozen spines of dark wood, sharp at one end and rounded at theother, like that which had struck Bartholomew Sholto.
"They are hellish things," said he. "Look out that you don't prickyourself. I'm delighted to have them, for the chances are that theyare all he has. There is the less fear of you or me finding one inour skin before long. I would sooner face a Martini bullet, myself.Are you game for a six-mile trudge, Watson?"
"Certainly," I answered.
"Your leg will stand it?"
"Oh, yes."
"Here you are, doggy! Good old Toby! Smell it, Toby, smell it!" Hepushed the creasote handkerchief under the dog's nose, while thecreature stood with its fluffy legs separated, and with a mostcomical cock to its head, like a connoisseur sniffing the bouquet ofa famous vintage. Holmes then threw the handkerchief to a distance,fastened a stout cord to the mongrel's collar, and let him to thefoot of the water-barrel. The creature instantly broke into asuccession of high, tremulous yelps, and, with his nose on theground, and his tail in the air, pattered off upon the trail at apace which strained his leash and kept us at the top of our speed.
The east had been gradually whitening, and we could now see somedistance in the cold gray light. The square, massive house, with itsblack, empty windows and high, bare walls, towered up, sad andforlorn, behind us. Our course let right across the grounds, in andout among the trenches and pits with which they were scarred andintersected. The whole place, with its scattered dirt-heaps andill-grown shrubs, had a blighted, ill-omened look which harmonizedwith the black tragedy which hung over it.
On reaching the boundary wall Toby ran along, whining eagerly,underneath its shadow, and stopped finally in a corner screened by ayoung beech. Where the two walls joined, several bricks had beenloosened, and the crevices left were worn down and rounded upon thelower side, as though they had frequently been used as a ladder.Holmes clambered up, and, taking the dog from me, he dropped it overupon the other side.
"There's the print of wooden-leg's hand," he remarked, as I mountedup beside him. "You see the slight smudge of blood upon the whiteplaster. What a lucky thing it is that we have had no very heavy rainsince yesterday! The scent will lie upon the road in spite of theireight-and-twenty hours' start."
I confess that I had my doubts myself when I reflected upon the greattraffic which had passed along the London road in the interval. Myfears were soon appeased, however. Toby never hesitated or swerved,but waddled on in his peculiar rolling fashion. Clearly, the pungentsmell of the creasote rose high above all other contending scents.
"Do not imagine," said Holmes, "that I depend for my success in thiscase upon the mere chance of one of these fellows having put his footin the chemical. I have knowledge now which would enable me to tracethem in many different ways. This, however, is the readiest and,since fortune has put it into our hands, I should be culpable if Ineglected it. It has, however, prevented the case from becoming thepretty little intellectual problem which it at one time promised tobe. There might have been some credit to be gained out of it, but forthis too palpable clue."
"There is credit, and to spare," said I. "I assure you, Holmes, thatI marvel at the means by which you obtain your results in this case,even more than I did in the Jefferson Hope Murder. The thing seems tome to be deeper and more inexplicable. How, for example, could youdescribe with such confidence the wooden-legged man?"
"Pshaw, my dear boy! it was simplicity itself. I don't wish to betheatrical. It is all patent and above-board. Two officers who are incommand of a convict-guard learn an important secret as to buriedtreasure. A map is drawn for them by an Englishman named JonathanSmall. You remember that we saw the name upon the chart in CaptainMorstan's possession. He had signed it in behalf of himself and hisassociates,--the sign of the four, as he somewhat dramatically calledit. Aided by this chart, the officers--or one of them--gets thetreasure and brings it to England, leaving, we will suppose, somecondition under which he received it unfulfilled. Now, then, why didnot Jonathan Small get the treasure himself? The answer is obvious.The chart is dated at a time when Morstan was brought into closeassociation with convicts. Jonathan Small did not get the treasurebecause he and his associates were themselves convicts and could notget away."
"But that is mere speculation," said I.
"It is more than that. It is the only hypothesis which covers thefacts. Let us see how it fits in with the sequel. Major Sholtoremains at peace for some years, happy in the possession of histreasure. Then he receives a letter from India which gives him agreat fright. What was that?"
"A letter to say that the men whom he had wronged had been set free."
"Or had escaped. That is much more likely, for he would have knownwhat their term of imprisonment was. It would not have been asurprise to him. What does he do then? He guards himself against awooden-legged man,--a white man, mark you, for he mistakes a whitetradesman for him, and actually fires a pistol at him. Now, only onewhite man's name is on the chart. The others are Hindoos orMohammedans. There is no other white man. Therefore we may say withconfidence that the wooden-legged man is identical with JonathanSmall. Does the reasoning strike yo as being faulty?"
"No: it is clear and concise."
"Well, now, let us put ourselves in the place of Jonathan Small. Letus look at it from his point of view. He comes to England with thedouble idea of regaining what he would consider to be his rights andof having his revenge upon the man who had wronged him. He found outwhere Sholto lived, and very possibly he established communicationswith some one inside the house. There is this butler, Lal Rao, whomwe have not seen. Mrs. Bernstone gives him far from a good character.Small could not find out, however, where the treasure was hid, for noone ever knew, save the major and one faithful servant who had died.Suddenly Small learns that the major is on his death-bed. In a frenzylest the secret of the treasure die with him, he runs the gauntlet ofthe guards, makes his way to the dying man's window, and is onlydeterred from entering by the presence of his two sons. Mad withhate, however, against the dead man, he enters the room that night,searches his private papers in the hope of discovering somememorandum relating to the treasure, and finally leaves a memento ofhis visit in the short inscription upon the card. He had doubtlessplanned beforehand that should he slay the major he would leave somesuch record upon the body as a sign that it was not a common murder,but, from the point of view of the four associates, something in thenature of an act of justice. Whimsical and bizarre conceits of thiskind are common enough in the annals of crime, and usually affordvaluable indications as to the criminal. Do you follow all this?"
"Very clearly."
"Now, what could Jonathan Small do? He could only continue to keep asecret watch upon the efforts made to find the treasure. Possibly heleaves England and only comes back at intervals. Then comes thediscovery of the garret, and he is instantly informed of it. We againtrace the presence of some confederate in the household. Jonathan,with his wooden leg, is utterly unable to reach the lofty room ofBartholomew Sholto. He takes with him, however, a rather curiousassociate, who gets over this difficulty, but dips his naked footinto creasote, whence come Toby, and a six-mile limp for a half-payofficer with a damaged tendo Achillis."
"But it was the associate, and not Jonathan, who committed thecrime."
"Quite so. And rather to Jonathan's disgust, to judge by the way thestamped about when he got into the room. He bore no grudge againstBartholomew Sholto, and would have preferred if he could have beensimply bound and gagged. He did not wish to put his head in a halter.There was no help for it, however: the savage instincts of hiscompanion had broken out, and the poison had done its work: soJonathan Small left his record, lowered the treasure-box to theground, and followed it himself. That was the train of events as faras I can decipher them. Of course as to his personal appearance hemust be middle-aged, and must be sunburned after serving his time insuch an oven as the Andamans. His height is readily calculated fromthe length of his stride, and we know that he was bearded. Hishairiness was the one point which impressed itself upon ThaddeusSholto when he saw him at the window. I don't know that there isanything else."
"The associate?"
"Ah, well, there is no great mystery in that. But you will know allabout it soon enough. How sweet the morning air is! See how that onelittle cloud floats like a pink feather from some gigantic flamingo.Now the red rim of the sun pushes itself over the London cloud-bank.It shines on a good many folk, but on none, I dare bet, who are on astranger errand than you and I. How small we feel with our pettyambitions and strivings in the presence of the great elemental forcesof nature! Are you well up in your Jean Paul?"
"Fairly so. I worked back to him through Carlyle."
"That was like following the brook to the parent lake. He makes onecurious but profound remark. It is that the chief proof of man's realgreatness lies in his perception of his own smallness. It argues, yousee, a power of comparison and of appreciation which is in itself aproof of nobility. There is much food for thought in Richter. Youhave not a pistol, have you?"
"I have my stick."
"It is just possible that we may need something of the sort if we getto their lair. Jonathan I shall leave to you, but if the other turnsnasty I shall shoot him dead." He took out his revolver as he spoke,and, having loaded two of the chambers, he put it back into theright-hand pocket of his jacket.
We had during this time been following the guidance of Toby down thehalf-rural villa-lined roads which lead to the metropolis. Now,however, we were beginning to come among continuous streets, wherelaborers and dockmen were already astir, and slatternly women weretaking down shutters and brushing door-steps. At the square-toppedcorner public houses business was just beginning, and rough-lookingmen were emerging, rubbing their sleeves across their beards aftertheir morning wet. Strange dogs sauntered up and stared wonderinglyat us as we passed, but our inimitable Toby looked neither to theright nor to the left, but trotted onwards with his nose to theground and an occasional eager whine which spoke of a hot scent.
We had traversed Streatham, Brixton, Camberwell, and now foundourselves in Kennington Lane, having borne away through theside-streets to the east of the Oval. The men whom we pursued seemedto have taken a curiously zigzag road, with the idea probably ofescaping observation. They had never kept to the main road if aparallel side-street would serve their turn. At the foot ofKennington Lane they had edged away to the left through Bond Streetand Miles Street. Where the latter street turns into Knight's Place,Toby ceased to advance, but began to run backwards and forwards withone ear cocked and the other drooping, the very picture of canineindecision. Then he waddled round in circles, looking up to us fromtime to time, as if to ask for sympathy in his embarrassment.
"What the deuce is the matter with the dog?" growled Holmes. "Theysurely would not take a cab, or go off in a balloon."
"Perhaps they stood here for some time," I suggested.
"Ah! it's all right. He's off again," said my companion, in a tone ofrelief.
He was indeed off, for after sniffing round again he suddenly made uphis mind, and darted away with an energy and determination such as hehad not yet shown. The scent appeared to be much hotter than before,for he had not even to put his nose on the ground, but tugged at hisleash and tried to break into a run. I cold see by the gleam inHolmes's eyes that he thought we were nearing the end of our journey.
Our course now ran down Nine Elms until we came to Broderick andNelson's large timber-yard, just past the White Eagle tavern. Herethe dog, frantic with excitement, turned down through the side-gateinto the enclosure, where the sawyers were already at work. On thedog raced through sawdust and shavings, down an alley, round apassage, between two wood-piles, and finally, with a triumphant yelp,sprang upon a large barrel which still stood upon the hand-trolley onwhich it had been brought. With lolling tongue and blinking eyes,Toby stood upon the cask, looking from one to the other of us forsome sign of appreciation. The staves of the barrel and the wheels ofthe trolley were smeared with a dark liquid, and the whole air washeavy with the smell of creasote.
Sherlock Holmes and I looked blankly at each other, and then burstsimultaneously into an uncontrollable fit of laughter.




     CHAPTER VIII     The Baker Street Irregulars

"What now?" I asked. "Toby has lost his character for infallibility."
"He acted according to his lights," said Holmes, lifting him downfrom the barrel and walking him out of the timber-yard. "If youconsider how much creasote is carted about London in one day, it isno great wonder that our trail should have been crossed. It is muchused now, especially for the seasoning of wood. Poor Toby is not toblame."
"We must get on the main scent again, I suppose."
"Yes. And, fortunately, we have no distance to go. Evidently whatpuzzled the dog at the corner of Knight's Place was that there weretwo different trails running in opposite directions. We took thewrong one. It only remains to follow the other."
There was no difficulty about this. On leading Toby to the placewhere he had committed his fault, he cast about in a wide circle andfinally dashed off in a fresh direction.
"We must take care that he does not now bring us to the place wherethe creasote-barrel came from," I observed.
"I had thought of that. But you notice that he keeps on the pavement,whereas the barrel passed down the roadway. No, we are on the truescent now."
It tended down towards the river-side, running through Belmont Placeand Prince's Street. At the end of Broad Street it ran right down tothe water's edge, where there was a small wooden wharf. Toby led usto the very edge of this, and there stood whining, looking out on thedark current beyond.
"We are out of luck," said Holmes. "They have taken to a boat here."Several small punts and skiffs were lying about in the water and onthe edge of the wharf. We took Toby round to each in turn, but,though he sniffed earnestly, he made no sign.
Close to the rude landing-stage was a small brick house, with awooden placard slung out through the second window. "Mordecai Smith"was printed across it in large letters, and, underneath, "Boats tohire by the hour or day." A second inscription above the doorinformed us that a steam launch was kept,--a statement which wasconfirmed by a great pile of coke upon the jetty. Sherlock Holmeslooked slowly round, and his face assumed an ominous expression.
"This looks bad," said he. "These fellows are sharper than Iexpected. They seem to have covered their tracks. There has, I fear,been preconcerted management here."
He was approaching the door of the house, when it opened, and alittle, curly-headed lad of six came running out, followed by astoutish, red-faced woman with a large sponge in her hand.
"You come back and be washed, Jack," she shouted. "Come back, youyoung imp; for if your father comes home and finds you like that,he'll let us hear of it."
"Dear little chap!" said Holmes, strategically. "What a rosy-cheekedyoung rascal! Now, Jack, is there anything you would like?"
The youth pondered for a moment. "I'd like a shillin'," said he.
"Nothing you would like better?"
"I'd like two shillin' better," the prodigy answered, after somethought.
"Here you are, then! Catch!--A fine child, Mrs. Smith!"
"Lor' bless you, sir, he is that, and forward. He gets a'most toomuch for me to manage, 'specially when my man is away days at atime."
"Away, is he?" said Holmes, in a disappointed voice. "I am sorry forthat, for I wanted to speak to Mr. Smith."
"He's been away since yesterday mornin', sir, and, truth to tell, Iam beginnin' to feel frightened about him. But if it was about aboat, sir, maybe I could serve as well."
"I wanted to hire his steam launch."
"Why, bless you, sir, it is in the steam launch that he has gone.That's what puzzles me; for I know there ain't more coals in her thanwould take her to about Woolwich and back. If he'd been away in thebarge I'd ha' thought nothin'; for many a time a job has taken him asfar as Gravesend, and then if there was much doin' there he might ha'stayed over. But what good is a steam launch without coals?"
"He might have bought some at a wharf down the river."
"He might, sir, but it weren't his way. Many a time I've heard himcall out at the prices they charge for a few odd bags. Besides, Idon't like that wooden-legged man, wi' his ugly face and outlandishtalk. What did he want always knockin' about here for?"
"A wooden-legged man?" said Holmes, with bland surprise.
"Yes, sir, a brown, monkey-faced chap that's called more'n once formy old man. It was him that roused him up yesternight, and, what'smore, my man knew he was comin', for he had steam up in the launch. Itell you straight, sir, I don't feel easy in my mind about it."
"But, my dear Mrs. Smith," said Holmes, shrugging his shoulders, "Youare frightening yourself about nothing. How could you possibly tellthat it was the wooden-legged man who came in the night? I don'tquite understand how you can be so sure."
"His voice, sir. I knew his voice, which is kind o' thick and foggy.He tapped at the winder,--about three it would be. 'Show a leg,matey,' says he: 'time to turn out guard.' My old man woke upJim,--that's my eldest,--and away they went, without so much as aword to me. I could hear the wooden leg clackin' on the stones."
"And was this wooden-legged man alone?"
"Couldn't say, I am sure, sir. I didn't hear no one else."
"I am sorry, Mrs. Smith, for I wanted a steam launch, and I haveheard good reports of the--Let me see, what is her name?"
"The Aurora, sir."
"Ah! She's not that old green launch with a yellow line, very broadin the beam?"
"No, indeed. She's as trim a little thing as any on the river. She'sbeen fresh painted, black with two red streaks."
"Thanks. I hope that you will hear soon from Mr. Smith. I am goingdown the river; and if I should see anything of the Aurora I shalllet him know that you are uneasy. A black funnel, you say?"
"No, sir. Black with a white band."
"Ah, of course. It was the sides which were black. Good-morning, Mrs.Smith.--There is a boatman here with a wherry, Watson. We shall takeit and cross the river.
"The main thing with people of that sort," said Holmes, as we sat inthe sheets of the wherry, "is never to let them think that theirinformation can be of the slightest importance to you. If you do,they will instantly shut up like an oyster. If you listen to themunder protest, as it were, you are very likely to get what you want."
"Our course now seems pretty clear," said I.
"What would you do, then?"
"I would engage a launch and go down the river on the track of theAurora."
"My dear fellow, it would be a colossal task. She may have touched atany wharf on either side of the stream between here and Greenwich.Below the bridge there is a perfect labyrinth of landing-places formiles. It would take you days and days to exhaust them, if you setabout it alone."
"Employ the police, then."
"No. I shall probably call Athelney Jones in at the last moment. Heis not a bad fellow, and I should not like to do anything which wouldinjure him professionally. But I have a fancy for working it outmyself, now that we have gone so far."
"Could we advertise, then, asking for information from wharfingers?"
"Worse and worse! Our men would know that the chase was hot at theirheels, and they would be off out of the country. As it is, they arelikely enough to leave, but as long as they think they are perfectlysafe they will be in no hurry. Jones's energy will be of use to usthere, for his view of the case is sure to push itself into the dailypress, and the runaways will think that every one is off on the wrongscent."
"What are we to do, then?" I asked, as we landed near MillbankPenitentiary.
"Take this hansom, drive home, have some breakfast, and get an hour'ssleep. It is quite on the cards that we may be afoot to-night again.Stop at a telegraph-office, cabby! We will keep Toby, for he may beof use to us yet."
We pulled up at the Great Peter Street post-office, and Holmesdespatched his wire. "Whom do you think that is to?" he asked, as weresumed our journey.
"I am sure I don't know."
"You remember the Baker Street division of the detective police forcewhom I employed in the Jefferson Hope case?"
"Well," said I, laughing.
"This is just the case where they might be invaluable. If they fail,I have other resources; but I shall try them first. That wire was tomy dirty little lieutenant, Wiggins, and I expect that he and hisgang will be with us before we have finished our breakfast."
It was between eight and nine o'clock now, and I was conscious of astrong reaction after the successive excitements of the night. I waslimp and weary, befogged in mind and fatigued in body. I had not theprofessional enthusiasm which carried my companion on, nor could Ilook at the matter as a mere abstract intellectual problem. As far asthe death of Bartholomew Sholto went, I had heard little good of him,and could feel no intense antipathy to his murderers. The treasure,however, was a different matter. That, or part of it, belongedrightfully to Miss Morstan. While there was a chance of recovering itI was ready to devote my life to the one object. True, if I found itit would probably put her forever beyond my reach. Yet it would be apetty and selfish love which would be influenced by such a thought asthat. If Holmes could work to find the criminals, I had a tenfoldstronger reason to urge me on to find the treasure.
A bath at Baker Street and a complete change freshened me upwonderfully. When I came down to our room I found the breakfast laidand Holmes pouring out the coffee.
"Here it is," said he, laughing, and pointing to an open newspaper."The energetic Jones and the ubiquitous reporter have fixed it upbetween them. But you have had enough of the case. Better have yourham and eggs first."
I took the paper from him and read the short notice, which was headed"Mysterious Business at Upper Norwood."
"About twelve o'clock last night," said the Standard, "Mr.Bartholomew Sholto, of Pondicherry Lodge, Upper Norwood, was founddead in his room under circumstances which point to foul play. As faras we can learn, no actual traces of violence were found upon Mr.Sholto's person, but a valuable collection of Indian gems which thedeceased gentleman had inherited from his father has been carriedoff. The discovery was first made by Mr. Sherlock Holmes and Dr.Watson, who had called at the house with Mr. Thaddeus Sholto, brotherof the deceased. By a singular piece of good fortune, Mr. AthelneyJones, the well-known member of the detective police force, happenedto be at the Norwood Police Station, and was on the ground withinhalf an hour of the first alarm. His trained and experiencedfaculties were at once directed towards the detection of thecriminals, with the gratifying result that the brother, ThaddeusSholto, has already been arrested, together with the housekeeper,Mrs. Bernstone, an Indian butler named Lal Rao, and a porter, orgatekeeper, named McMurdo. It is quite certain that the thief orthieves were well acquainted with the house, for Mr. Jones'swell-known technical knowledge and his powers of minute observationhave enabled him to prove conclusively that the miscreants could nothave entered by the door or by the window, but must have made theirway across the roof of the building, and so through a trap-door intoa room which communicated with that in which the body was found. Thisfact, which has been very clearly made out, proves conclusively thatit was no mere haphazard burglary. The prompt and energetic action ofthe officers of the law shows the great advantage of the presence onsuch occasions of a single vigorous and masterful mind. We cannot butthink that it supplies an argument to those who would wish to see ourdetectives more decentralized, and so brought into closer and moreeffective touch with the cases which it is their duty toinvestigate."
"Isn't it gorgeous!" said Holmes, grinning over his coffee-cup. "Whatdo you think of it?"
"I think that we have had a close shave ourselves of being arrestedfor the crime."
"So do I. I wouldn't answer for our safety now, if he should happento have another of his attacks of energy."
At this moment there was a loud ring at the bell, and I could hearMrs. Hudson, our landlady, raising her voice in a wail ofexpostulation and dismay.
"By heaven, Holmes," I said, half rising, "I believe that they arereally after us."
"No, it's not quite so bad as that. It is the unofficial force,--theBaker Street irregulars."
As he spoke, there came a swift pattering of naked feet upon thestairs, a clatter of high voices, and in rushed a dozen dirty andragged little street-Arabs. There was some show of discipline amongthem, despite their tumultuous entry, for they instantly drew up inline and stood facing us with expectant faces. One of their number,taller and older than the others, stood forward with an air oflounging superiority which was very funny in such a disreputablelittle carecrow.
"Got your message, sir," said he, "and brought 'em on sharp. Threebob and a tanner for tickets."
"Here you are," said Holmes, producing some silver. "In future theycan report to you, Wiggins, and you to me. I cannot have the houseinvaded in this way. However, it is just as well that you should allhear the instructions. I want to find the whereabouts of a steamlaunch called the Aurora, owner Mordecai Smith, black with two redstreaks, funnel black with a white band. She is down the riversomewhere. I want one boy to be at Mordecai Smith's landing-stageopposite Millbank to say if the boat comes back. You must divide itout among yourselves, and do both banks thoroughly. Let me know themoment you have news. Is that all clear?"
"Yes, guv'nor," said Wiggins.
"The old scale of pay, and a guinea to the boy who finds the boat.Here's a day in advance. Now off you go!" He handed them a shillingeach, and away they buzzed down the stairs, and I saw them a momentlater streaming down the street.
"If the launch is above water they will find her," said Holmes, as herose from the table and lit his pipe. "They can go everywhere, seeeverything, overhear every one. I expect to hear before evening thatthey have spotted her. In the mean while, we can do nothing but awaitresults. We cannot pick up the broken trail until we find either theAurora or Mr. Mordecai Smith."
"Toby could eat these scraps, I dare say. Are you going to bed,Holmes?"
"No: I am not tired. I have a curious constitution. I never rememberfeeling tired by work, though idleness exhausts me completely. I amgoing to smoke and to think over this queer business to which my fairclient has introduced us. If ever man had an easy task, this of oursought to be. Wooden-legged men are not so common, but the other manmust, I should think, be absolutely unique."
"That other man again!"
"I have no wish to make a mystery of him,--to you, anyway. But youmust have formed your own opinion. Now, do consider the data.Diminutive footmarks, toes never fettered by boots, naked feet,stone-headed wooden mace, great agility, small poisoned darts. Whatdo you make of all this?"
"A savage!" I exclaimed. "Perhaps one of those Indians who were theassociates of Jonathan Small."
"Hardly that," said he. "When first I saw signs of strange weapons Iwas inclined to think so; but the remarkable character of thefootmarks caused me to reconsider my views. Some of the inhabitantsof the Indian Peninsula are small men, but none could have left suchmarks as that. The Hindoo proper has long and thin feet. Thesandal-wearing Mohammedan has the great toe well separated from theothers, because the thong is commonly passed between. These littledarts, too, could only be shot in one way. They are from a blow-pipe.Now, then, where are we to find our savage?"
"South American," I hazarded.
He stretched his hand up, and took down a bulky volume from theshelf. "This is the first volume of a gazetteer which is now beingpublished. It may be looked upon as the very latest authority. Whathave we here? 'Andaman Islands, situated 340 miles to the north ofSumatra, in the Bay of Bengal.' Hum! hum!  What's all this? Moistclimate, coral reefs, sharks, Port Blair, convict-barracks, RutlandIsland, cottonwoods--Ah, here we are. 'The aborigines of the AndamanIslands may perhaps claim the distinction of being the smallest raceupon this earth, though some anthropologists prefer the Bushmen ofAfrica, the Digger Indians of America, and the Terra del Fuegians.The average height is rather below four feet, although manyfull-grown adults may be found who are very much smaller than this.They are a fierce, morose, and intractable people, though capable offorming most devoted friendships when their confidence has once beengained.' Mark that, Watson. Now, then, listen to this. 'They arenaturally hideous, having large, misshapen heads, small, fierce eyes,and distorted features. Their feet and hands, however, are remarkablysmall. So intractable and fierce are they that all the efforts of theBritish official have failed to win them over in any degree. Theyhave always been a terror to shipwrecked crews, braining thesurvivors with their stone-headed clubs, or shooting them with theirpoisoned arrows. These massacres are invariably concluded by acannibal feast.' Nice, amiable people, Watson! If this fellow hadbeen left to his own unaided devices this affair might have taken aneven more ghastly turn. I fancy that, even as it is, Jonathan Smallwould give a good deal not to have employed him."
"But how came he to have so singular a companion?"
"Ah, that is more than I can tell. Since, however, we had alreadydetermined that Small had come from the Andamans, it is not so verywonderful that this islander should be with him. No doubt we shallknow all about it in time. Look here, Watson; you look regularlydone. Lie down there on the sofa, and see if I can put you to sleep."
He took up his violin from the corner, and as I stretched myself outhe began to play some low, dreamy, melodious air,--his own, no doubt,for he had a remarkable gift for improvisation. I have a vagueremembrance of his gaunt limbs, his earnest face, and the rise andfall of his bow. Then I seemed to be floated peacefully away upon asoft sea of sound, until I found myself in dream-land, with the sweetface of Mary Morstan looking down upon me.




     CHAPTER IX     A Break in the Chain

It was late in the afternoon before I woke, strengthened andrefreshed. Sherlock Holmes still sat exactly as I had left him, savethat he had laid aside his violin and was deep in a book. He lookedacross at me, as I stirred, and I noticed that his face was dark andtroubled.
"You have slept soundly," he said. "I feared that our talk would wakeyou."
"I heard nothing," I answered. "Have you had fresh news, then?"
"Unfortunately, no. I confess that I am surprised and disappointed. Iexpected something definite by this time.  Wiggins has just been upto report. He says that no trace can be found of the launch. It is aprovoking check, for every hour is of importance."
"Can I do anything? I am perfectly fresh now, and quite ready foranother night's outing."
"No, we can do nothing. We can only wait. If we go ourselves, themessage might come in our absence, and delay be caused. You can dowhat you will, but I must remain on guard."
"Then I shall run over to Camberwell and call upon Mrs. CecilForrester. She asked me to, yesterday."
"On Mrs. Cecil Forrester?" asked Holmes, with the twinkle of a smilein his eyes.
"Well, of course Miss Morstan too. They were anxious to hear whathappened."
"I would not tell them too much," said Holmes. "Women are never to beentirely trusted,--not the best of them."
I did not pause to argue over this atrocious sentiment. "I shall beback in an hour or two," I remarked.
"All right! Good luck! But, I say, if you are crossing the river youmay as well return Toby, for I don't think it is at all likely thatwe shall have any use for him now."
I took our mongrel accordingly, and left him, together with ahalf-sovereign, at the old naturalist's in Pinchin Lane. AtCamberwell I found Miss Morstan a little weary after her night'sadventures, but very eager to hear the news. Mrs. Forrester, too, wasfull of curiosity. I told them all that we had done, suppressing,however, the more dreadful parts of the tragedy. Thus, although Ispoke of Mr. Sholto's death, I said nothing of the exact manner andmethod of it. With all my omissions, however, there was enough tostartle and amaze them.
"It is a romance!" cried Mrs. Forrester. "An injured lady, half amillion in treasure, a black cannibal, and a wooden-legged ruffian.They take the place of the conventional dragon or wicked earl."
"And two knight-errants to the rescue," added Miss Morstan, with abright glance at me.
"Why, Mary, your fortune depends upon the issue of this search. Idon't think that you are nearly excited enough. Just imagine what itmust be to be so rich, and to have the world at your feet!"
It sent a little thrill of joy to my heart to notice that she showedno sign of elation at the prospect. On the contrary, she gave a tossof her proud head, as though the matter were one in which she tooksmall interest.
"It is for Mr. Thaddeus Sholto that I am anxious," she said. "Nothingelse is of any consequence; but I think that he has behaved mostkindly and honorably throughout. It is our duty to clear him of thisdreadful and unfounded charge."
It was evening before I left Camberwell, and quite dark by the time Ireached home. My companion's book and pipe lay by his chair, but hehad disappeared. I looked about in the hope of seeing a note, butthere was none.
"I suppose that Mr. Sherlock Holmes has gone out," I said to Mrs. Hudson as she came up to lower the blinds.
"No, sir. He has gone to his room, sir. Do you know, sir," sinkingher voice into an impressive whisper, "I am afraid for his health?"
"Why so, Mrs. Hudson?"
"Well, he's that strange, sir. After you was gone he walked and hewalked, up and down, and up and down, until I was weary of the soundof his footstep. Then I heard him talking to himself and muttering,and every time the bell rang out he came on the stairhead, with 'Whatis that, Mrs. Hudson?' And now he has slammed off to his room, but Ican hear him walking away the same as ever. I hope he's not going tobe ill, sir. I ventured to say something to him about coolingmedicine, but he turned on me, sir, with such a look that I don'tknow how ever I got out of the room."
"I don't think that you have any cause to be uneasy, Mrs. Hudson," Ianswered. "I have seen him like this before. He has some small matterupon his mind which makes him restless." I tried to speak lightly toour worthy landlady, but I was myself somewhat uneasy when throughthe long night I still from time to time heard the dull sound of histread, and knew how his keen spirit was chafing against thisinvoluntary inaction.
At breakfast-time he looked worn and haggard, with a little fleck offeverish color upon either cheek.
"You are knocking yourself up, old man," I remarked. "I heard youmarching about in the night."
"No, I could not sleep," he answered. "This infernal problem isconsuming me. It is too much to be balked by so petty an obstacle,when all else had been overcome. I know the men, the launch,everything; and yet I can get no news. I have set other agencies atwork, and used every means at my disposal. The whole river has beensearched on either side, but there is no news, nor has Mrs. Smithheard of her husband. I shall come to the conclusion soon that theyhave scuttled the craft. But there are objections to that."
"Or that Mrs. Smith has put us on a wrong scent."
"No, I think that may be dismissed. I had inquiries made, and thereis a launch of that description."
"Could it have gone up the river?"
"I have considered that possibility too, and there is a search-partywho will work up as far as Richmond. If no news comes to-day, I shallstart off myself to-morrow, and go for the men rather than the boat.But surely, surely, we shall hear something."
We did not, however. Not a word came to us either from Wiggins orfrom the other agencies. There were articles in most of the papersupon the Norwood tragedy. They all appeared to be rather hostile tothe unfortunate Thaddeus Sholto. No fresh details were to be found,however, in any of them, save that an inquest was to be held upon thefollowing day. I walked over to Camberwell in the evening to reportour ill success to the ladies, and on my return I found Holmesdejected and somewhat morose. He would hardly reply to my questions,and busied himself all evening in an abstruse chemical analysis whichinvolved much heating of retorts and distilling of vapors, ending atlast in a smell which fairly drove me out of the apartment. Up to thesmall hours of the morning I could hear the clinking of histest-tubes which told me that he was still engaged in his malodorousexperiment.
In the early dawn I woke with a start, and was surprised to find himstanding by my bedside, clad in a rude sailor dress with apea-jacket, and a coarse red scarf round his neck.
"I am off down the river, Watson," said he. "I have been turning itover in my mind, and I can see only one way out of it. It is worthtrying, at all events."
"Surely I can come with you, then?" said I.
"No; you can be much more useful if you will remain here as myrepresentative. I am loath to go, for it is quite on the cards thatsome message may come during the day, though Wiggins was despondentabout it last night. I want you to open all notes and telegrams, andto act on your own judgment if any news should come. Can I rely uponyou?"
"Most certainly."
"I am afraid that you will not be able to wire to me, for I canhardly tell yet where I may find myself. If I am in luck, however, Imay not be gone so very long. I shall have news of some sort or otherbefore I get back."
I had heard nothing of him by breakfast-time. On opening theStandard, however, I found that there was a fresh allusion to thebusiness.
"With reference to the Upper Norwood tragedy," it remarked, "we havereason to believe that the matter promises to be even more complexand mysterious than was originally supposed. Fresh evidence has shownthat it is quite impossible that Mr. Thaddeus Sholto could have beenin any way concerned in the matter. He and the housekeeper, Mrs.Bernstone, were both released yesterday evening. It is believed,however, that the police have a clue as to the real culprits, andthat it is being prosecuted by Mr. Athelney Jones, of Scotland Yard,with all his well-known energy and sagacity. Further arrests may beexpected at any moment."
"That is satisfactory so far as it goes," thought I. "Friend Sholtois safe, at any rate. I wonder what the fresh clue may be; though itseems to be a stereotyped form whenever the police have made ablunder."
I tossed the paper down upon the table, but at that moment my eyecaught an advertisement in the agony column. It ran in this way:
"Lost.--Whereas Mordecai Smith, boatman, and his son, Jim, leftSmith's Wharf at or about three o'clock last Tuesday morning in thesteam launch Aurora, black with two red stripes, funnel black with awhite band, the sum of five pounds will be paid to any one who cangive information to Mrs. Smith, at Smith's Wharf, or at 221b BakerStreet, as to the whereabouts of the said Mordecai Smith and thelaunch Aurora."
This was clearly Holmes's doing. The Baker Street address was enoughto prove that. It struck me as rather ingenious, because it might beread by the fugitives without their seeing in it more than thenatural anxiety of a wife for her missing husband.
It was a long day. Every time that a knock came to the door, or asharp step passed in the street, I imagined that it was either Holmesreturning or an answer to his advertisement. I tried to read, but mythoughts would wander off to our strange quest and to theill-assorted and villainous pair whom we were pursuing. Could therebe, I wondered, some radical flaw in my companion's reasoning. Mighthe be suffering from some huge self-deception? Was it not possiblethat his nimble and speculative mind had built up this wild theoryupon faulty premises? I had never known him to be wrong; and yet thekeenest reasoner may occasionally be deceived. He was likely, Ithought, to fall into error through the over-refinement of hislogic,--his preference for a subtle and bizarre explanation when aplainer and more commonplace one lay ready to his hand. Yet, on theother hand, I had myself seen the evidence, and I had heard thereasons for his deductions. When I looked back on the long chain ofcurious circumstances, many of them trivial in themselves, but alltending in the same direction, I could not disguise from myself thateven if Holmes's explanation were incorrect the true theory must beequally outr and startling.
At three o'clock in the afternoon there was a loud peal at the bell,an authoritative voice in the hall, and, to my surprise, no less aperson than Mr. Athelney Jones was shown up to me. Very different washe, however, from the brusque and masterful professor of common sensewho had taken over the case so confidently at Upper Norwood. Hisexpression was downcast, and his bearing meek and even apologetic.
"Good-day, sir; good-day," said he. "Mr. Sherlock Holmes is out, Iunderstand."
"Yes, and I cannot be sure when he will be back. But perhaps youwould care to wait. Take that chair and try one of these cigars."
"Thank you; I don't mind if I do," said he, mopping his face with ared bandanna handkerchief.
"And a whiskey-and-soda?"
"Well, half a glass. It is very hot for the time of year; and I havehad a good deal to worry and try me. You know my theory about thisNorwood case?"
"I remember that you expressed one."
"Well, I have been obliged to reconsider it. I had my net drawntightly round Mr. Sholto, sir, when pop he went through a hole in themiddle of it. He was able to prove an alibi which could not beshaken. From the time that he left his brother's room he was neverout of sight of some one or other. So it could not be he who climbedover roofs and through trap-doors. It's a very dark case, and myprofessional credit is at stake. I should be very glad of a littleassistance."
"We all need help sometimes," said I.
"Your friend Mr. Sherlock Holmes is a wonderful man, sir," said he,in a husky and confidential voice. "He's a man who is not to be beat.I have known that young man go into a good many cases, but I neversaw the case yet that he could not throw a light upon. He isirregular in his methods, and a little quick perhaps in jumping attheories, but, on the whole, I think he would have made a mostpromising officer, and I don't care who knows it. I have had a wirefrom him this morning, by which I understand that he has got someclue to this Sholto business. Here is the message."
He took the telegram out of his pocket, and handed it to me. It wasdated from Poplar at twelve o'clock. "Go to Baker Street at once," itsaid. "If I have not returned, wait for me. I am close on the trackof the Sholto gang. You can come with us to-night if you want to bein at the finish."
"This sounds well. He has evidently picked up the scent again," saidI.
"Ah, then he has been at fault too," exclaimed Jones, with evidentsatisfaction. "Even the best of us are thrown off sometimes. Ofcourse this may prove to be a false alarm; but it is my duty as anofficer of the law to allow no chance to slip. But there is some oneat the door. Perhaps this is he."
A heavy step was heard ascending the stair, with a great wheezing andrattling as from a man who was sorely put to it for breath. Once ortwice he stopped, as though the climb were too much for him, but atlast he made his way to our door and entered. His appearancecorresponded to the sounds which we had heard. He was an aged man,clad in seafaring garb, with an old pea-jacket buttoned up to histhroat. His back was bowed, his knees were shaky, and his breathingwas painfully asthmatic. As he leaned upon a thick oaken cudgel hisshoulders heaved in the effort to draw the air into his lungs. He hada colored scarf round his chin, and I could see little of his facesave a pair of keen dark eyes, overhung by bushy white brows, andlong gray side-whiskers. Altogether he gave me the impression of arespectable master mariner who had fallen into years and poverty.
"What is it, my man?" I asked.
He looked about him in the slow methodical fashion of old age.
"Is Mr. Sherlock Holmes here?" said he.
"No; but I am acting for him. You can tell me any message you havefor him."
"It was to him himself I was to tell it," said he.
"But I tell you that I am acting for him. Was it about MordecaiSmith's boat?"
"Yes. I knows well where it is. An' I knows where the men he is afterare. An' I knows where the treasure is. I knows all about it."
"Then tell me, and I shall let him know."
"It was to him I was to tell it," he repeated, with the petulantobstinacy of a very old man.
"Well, you must wait for him."
"No, no; I ain't goin' to lose a whole day to please no one. If Mr.Holmes ain't here, then Mr. Holmes must find it all out for himself.I don't care about the look of either of you, and I won't tell aword."
He shuffled towards the door, but Athelney Jones got in front of him.
"Wait a bit, my friend," said he. "You have important information,and you must not walk off. We shall keep you, whether you like ornot, until our friend returns."
The old man made a little run towards the door, but, as AthelneyJones put his broad back up against it, he recognized the uselessnessof resistance.
"Pretty sort o' treatment this!" he cried, stamping his stick. "Icome here to see a gentleman, and you two, who I never saw in mylife, seize me and treat me in this fashion!"
"You will be none the worse," I said. "We shall recompense you forthe loss of your time. Sit over here on the sofa, and you will nothave long to wait."
He came across sullenly enough, and seated himself with his faceresting on his hands. Jones and I resumed our cigars and our talk.Suddenly, however, Holmes's voice broke in upon us.
"I think that you might offer me a cigar too," he said.
We both started in our chairs. There was Holmes sitting close to uswith an air of quiet amusement.
"Holmes!" I exclaimed. "You here! But where is the old man?"
"Here is the old man," said he, holding out a heap of white hair."Here he is,--wig, whiskers, eyebrows, and all. I thought my disguisewas pretty good, but I hardly expected that it would stand thattest."
"Ah, you rogue!" cried Jones, highly delighted. "You would have madean actor, and a rare one. You had the proper workhouse cough, andthose weak legs of yours are worth ten pound a week. I thought I knewthe glint of your eye, though. You didn't get away from us so easily,you see."
"I have been working in that get-up all day," said he, lighting hiscigar. "You see, a good many of the criminal classes begin to knowme,--especially since our friend here took to publishing some of mycases: so I can only go on the war-path under some simple disguiselike this. You got my wire?"
"Yes; that was what brought me here."
"How has your case prospered?"
"It has all come to nothing. I have had to release two of myprisoners, and there is no evidence against the other two."
"Never mind. We shall give you two others in the place of them. Butyou must put yourself under my orders. You are welcome to all theofficial credit, but you must act on the line that I point out. Isthat agreed?"
"Entirely, if you will help me to the men."
"Well, then, in the first place I shall want a fast police-boat--asteam launch--to be at the Westminster Stairs at seven o'clock."
"That is easily managed. There is always one about there; but I canstep across the road and telephone to make sure."
"Then I shall want two stanch men, in case of resistance."
"There will be two or three in the boat. What else?"
"When we secure the men we shall get the treasure. I think that itwould be a pleasure to my friend here to take the box round to theyoung lady to whom half of it rightfully belongs. Let her be thefirst to open it.--Eh, Watson?"
"It would be a great pleasure to me."
"Rather an irregular proceeding," said Jones, shaking his head."However, the whole thing is irregular, and I suppose we must wink atit. The treasure must afterwards be handed over to the authoritiesuntil after the official investigation."
"Certainly. That is easily managed. One other point. I should muchlike to have a few details about this matter from the lips ofJonathan Small himself. You know I like to work the detail of mycases out. There is no objection to my having an unofficial interviewwith him, either here in my rooms or elsewhere, as long as he isefficiently guarded?"
"Well, you are master of the situation. I have had no proof yet ofthe existence of this Jonathan Small. However, if you can catch him Idon't see how I can refuse you an interview with him."
"That is understood, then?"
"Perfectly. Is there anything else?"
"Only that I insist upon your dining with us. It will be ready inhalf an hour. I have oysters and a brace of grouse, with something alittle choice in white wines.--Watson, you have never yet recognizedmy merits as a housekeeper."




     CHAPTER X     The End of the Islander

Our meal was a merry one. Holmes coud talk exceedingly well when hechose, and that night he did choose. He appeared to be in a state ofnervous exaltation. I have never known him so brilliant. He spoke ona quick succession of subjects,--on miracle-plays, on medievalpottery, on Stradivarius violins, on the Buddhism of Ceylon, and onthe war-ships of the future,--handling each as though he had made aspecial study of it. His bright humor marked the reaction from hisblack depression of the preceding days. Athelney Jones proved to be asociable soul in his hours of relaxation, and face his dinner withthe air of a bon vivant. For myself, I felt elated at the thoughtthat we were nearing the end of our task, and I caught something ofHolmes's gaiety. None of us alluded during dinner to the cause whichhad brought us together.
When the cloth was cleared, Holmes glanced at this watch, and filledup three glasses with port. "One bumper," said he, "to the success ofour little expedition. And now it is high time we were off. Have youa pistol, Watson?"
"I have my old service-revolver in my desk."
"You had best take it, then. It is well to be prepared. I see thatthe cab is at the door. I ordered it for half-past six."
It was a little past seven before we reached the Westminster wharf,and found our launch awaiting us. Holmes eyed it critically.
"Is there anything to mark it as a police-boat?"
"Yes,--that green lamp at the side."
"Then take it off."
The small change was made, we stepped on board, and the ropes werecast off. Jones, Holmes, and I sat in the stern. There was one man atthe rudder, one to tend the engines, and two burly police-inspectorsforward.
"Where to?" asked Jones.
"To the Tower. Tell them to stop opposite Jacobson's Yard."
Our craft was evidently a very fast one. We shot past the long linesof loaded barges as though they were stationary. Holmes smiled withsatisfaction as we overhauled a river steamer and left her behind us.
"We ought to be able to catch anything on the river," he said.
"Well, hardly that. But there are not many launches to beat us."
"We shall have to catch the Aurora, and she has a name for being aclipper. I will tell you how the land lies, Watson. You recollect howannoyed I was at being balked by so small a thing?"
"Yes."
"Well, I gave my mind a thorough rest by plunging into a chemicalanalysis. One of our greatest statesmen has said that a change ofwork is the best rest. So it is. When I had succeeded in dissolvingthe hydrocarbon which I was at work at, I came back to our problem ofthe Sholtos, and thought the whole matter out again. My boys had beenup the river and down the river without result. The launch was not atany landing-stage or wharf, nor had it returned. Yet it could hardlyhave been scuttled to hide their traces,--though that always remainedas a possible hypothesis if all else failed. I knew this man Smallhad a certain degree of low cunning, but I did not think him capableof anything in the nature of delicate finesse. That is usually aproduct of higher education. I then reflected that since he hadcertainly been in London some time--as we had evidence that hemaintained a continual watch over Pondicherry Lodge--he could hardlyleave at a moment's notice, but would need some little time, if itwere only a day, to arrange his affairs. That was the balance ofprobability, at any rate."
"It seems to me to be a little weak," said I. "It is more probablethat he had arranged his affairs before ever he set out upon hisexpedition."
"No, I hardly think so. This lair of his would be too valuable aretreat in case of need for him to give it up until he was sure thathe could do without it. But a second consideration struck me.Jonathan Small must have felt that the peculiar appearance of hiscompanion, however much he may have top-coated him, would give riseto gossip, and possibly be associated with this Norwood tragedy. Hewas quite sharp enough to see that. They had started from theirhead-quarters under cover of darkness, and he would wish to get backbefore it was broad light. Now, it was past three o'clock, accordingto Mrs. Smith, when they got the boat. It would be quite bright, andpeople would be about in an hour or so. Therefore, I argued, they didnot go very far. They paid Smith well to hold his tongue, reservedhis launch for the final escape, and hurried to their lodgings withthe treasure-box. In a couple of nights, when they had time to seewhat view the papers took, and whether there was any suspicion, theywould make their way under cover of darkness to some ship atGravesend or in the Downs, where no doubt they had already arrangedfor passages to America or the Colonies."
"But the launch? They could not have taken that to their lodgings."
"Quite so. I argued that the launch must be no great way off, inspite of its invisibility. I then put myself in the place of Small,and looked at it as a man of his capacity would. He would probablyconsider that to send back the launch or to keep it at a wharf wouldmake pursuit easy if the police did happen to get on his track. How,then, could he conceal the launch and yet have her at hand whenwanted? I wondered what I should do myself if I were in his shoes. Icould only think of one way of doing it. I might land the launch overto some boat-builder or repairer, with directions to make a triflingchange in her. She would then be removed to his shed or hard, and sobe effectually concealed, while at the same time I could have her ata few hours' notice."
"That seems simple enough."
"It is just these very simple things which are extremely liable to beoverlooked. However, I determined to act on the idea. I started atonce in this harmless seaman's rig and inquired at all the yards downthe river. I drew blank at fifteen, but at thesixteenth--Jacobson's--I learned that the Aurora had been handed overto them two days ago by a wooden-legged man, with some trivialdirections as to her rudder. 'There ain't naught amiss with herrudder,' said the foreman. 'There she lies, with the red streaks.' Atthat moment who should come down but Mordecai Smith, the missingowner? He was rather the worse for liquor. I should not, of course,have known him, but he bellowed out his name and the name of hislaunch. 'I want her to-night at eight o'clock,' said he,--'eighto'clock sharp, mind, for I have two gentlemen who won't be keptwaiting.' They had evidently paid him well, for he was very flush ofmoney, chucking shillings about to the men. I followed him somedistance, but he subsided into an ale-house: so I went back to theyard, and, happening to pick up one of my boys on the way, Istationed him as a sentry over the launch. He is to stand at water'sedge and wave his handkerchief to us when they start. We shall belying off in the stream, and it will be a strange thing if we do nottake men, treasure, and all."
"You have planned it all very neatly, whether they are the right menor not," said Jones; "but if the affair were in my hands I shouldhave had a body of police in Jacobson's Yard, and arrested them whenthey came down."
"Which would have been never. This man Small is a pretty shrewdfellow. He would send a scout on ahead, and if anything made himsuspicious lie snug for another week."
"But you might have stuck to Mordecai Smith, and so been led to theirhiding-place," said I.
"In that case I should have wasted my day. I think that it is ahundred to one against Smith knowing where they live. As long as hehas liquor and good pay, why should he ask questions? They send himmessages what to do. No, I thought over every possible course, andthis is the best."
While this conversation had been proceeding, we had been shooting thelong series of bridges which span the Thames. As we passed the Citythe last rays of the sun were gilding the cross upon the summit ofSt. Paul's. It was twilight before we reached the Tower.
"That is Jacobson's Yard," said Holmes, pointing to a bristle ofmasts and rigging on the Surrey side. "Cruise gently up and down hereunder cover of this string of lighters." He took a pair ofnight-glasses from his pocket and gazed some time at the shore. "Isee my sentry at his post," he remarked, "but no sign of ahandkerchief."
"Suppose we go down-stream a short way and lie in wait for them,"said Jones, eagerly. We were all eager by this time, even thepolicemen and stokers, who had a very vague idea of what was goingforward.
"We have no right to take anything for granted," Holmes answered. "Itis certainly ten to one that they go down-stream, but we cannot becertain. From this point we can see the entrance of the yard, andthey can hardly see us. It will be a clear night and plenty of light.We must stay where we are. See how the folk swarm over yonder in thegaslight."
"They are coming from work in the yard."
"Dirty-looking rascals, but I suppose every one has some littleimmortal spark concealed about him. You would not think it, to lookat them. There is no a priori probability about it. A strange enigmais man!"
"Some one calls him a soul concealed in an animal," I suggested.
"Winwood Reade is good upon the subject," said Holmes. "He remarksthat, while the individual man is an insoluble puzzle, in theaggregate he becomes a mathematical certainty. You can, for example,never foretell what any one man will do, but you can say withprecision what an average number will be up to. Individuals vary, butpercentages remain constant. So says the statistician. But do I see ahandkerchief? Surely there is a white flutter over yonder."
"Yes, it is your boy," I cried. "I can see him plainly."
"And there is the Aurora," exclaimed Holmes, "and going like thedevil! Full speed ahead, engineer. Make after that launch with theyellow light. By heaven, I shall never forgive myself if she provesto have the heels of us!"
She had slipped unseen through the yard-entrance and passed behindtwo or three small craft, so that she had fairly got her speed upbefore we saw her. Now she was flying down the stream, near in to theshore, going at a tremendous rate. Jones looked gravely at her andshook his head.
"She is very fast," he said. "I doubt if we shall catch her."
"We must catch her!" cried Holmes, between his teeth. "Heap it on,stokers! Make her do all she can! If we burn the boat we must havethem!"
We were fairly after her now. The furnaces roared, and the powerfulengines whizzed and clanked, like a great metallic heart. Her sharp,steep prow cut through the river-water and sent two rolling waves toright and to left of us. With every throb of the engines we sprangand quivered like a living thing. One great yellow lantern in ourbows threw a long, flickering funnel of light in front of us. Rightahead a dark blur upon the water showed where the Aurora lay, and theswirl of white foam behind her spoke of the pace at which she wasgoing. We flashed past barges, steamers, merchant-vessels, in andout, behind this one and round the other. Voices hailed us out of thedarkness, but still the Aurora thundered on, and still we followedclose upon her track.
"Pile it on, men, pile it on!" cried Holmes, looking down into theengine-room, while the fierce glow from below beat upon his eager,aquiline face. "Get every pound of steam you can."
"I think we gain a little," said Jones, with his eyes on the Aurora.
"I am sure of it," said I. "We shall be up with her in a very fewminutes."
At that moment, however, as our evil fate would have it, a tug withthree barges in tow blundered in between us. It was only by puttingour helm hard down that we avoided a collision, and before we couldround them and recover our way the Aurora had gained a good twohundred yards. She was still, however, well in view, and the murkyuncertain twilight was setting into a clear starlit night. Ourboilers were strained to their utmost, and the frail shell vibratedand creaked with the fierce energy which was driving us along. We hadshot through the Pool, past the West India Docks, down the longDeptford Reach, and up again after rounding the Isle of Dogs. Thedull blur in front of us resolved itself now clearly enough into thedainty Aurora. Jones turned our search-light upon her, so that wecould plainly see the figures upon her deck. One man sat by thestern, with something black between his knees over which he stooped.Beside him lay a dark mass which looked like a Newfoundland dog. Theboy held the tiller, while against the red glare of the furnace Icould see old Smith, stripped to the waist, and shovelling coals fordear life. They may have had some doubt at first as to whether wewere really pursuing them, but now as we followed every winding andturning which they took there could no longer be any question aboutit. At Greenwich we were about three hundred paces behind them. AtBlackwall we could not have been more than two hundred and fifty. Ihave coursed many creatures in many countries during my checkeredcareer, but never did sport give me such a wild thrill as this mad,flying man-hunt down the Thames. Steadily we drew in upon them, yardby yard. In the silence of the night we could hear the panting andclanking of their machinery. The man in the stern still crouched uponthe deck, and his arms were moving as though he were busy, whileevery now and then he would look up and measure with a glance thedistance which still separated us. Nearer we came and nearer. Jonesyelled to them to stop. We were not more than four boat's lengthsbehind them, both boats flying at a tremendous pace. It was a clearreach of the river, with Barking Level upon one side and themelancholy Plumstead Marshes upon the other. At our hail the man inthe stern sprang up from the deck and shook his two clinched fists atus, cursing the while in a high, cracked voice. He was a good-sized,powerful man, and as he stood poising himself with legs astride Icould see that from the thigh downwards there was but a wooden stumpupon the right side. At the sound of his strident, angry cries therewas movement in the huddled bundle upon the deck. It straighteneditself into a little black man--the smallest I have ever seen--with agreat, misshapen head and a shock of tangled, dishevelled hair.Holmes had already drawn his revolver, and I whipped out mine at thesight of this savage, distorted creature. He was wrapped in some sortof dark ulster or blanket, which left only his face exposed; but thatface was enough to give a man a sleepless night. Never have I seenfeatures so deeply marked with all bestiality and cruelty. His smalleyes glowed and burned with a sombre light, and his thick lips werewrithed back from his teeth, which grinned and chattered at us with ahalf animal fury.
"Fire if he raises his hand," said Holmes, quietly. We were within aboat's-length by this time, and almost within touch of our quarry. Ican see the two of them now as they stood, the white man with hislegs far apart, shrieking out curses, and the unhallowed dwarf withhis hideous face, and his strong yellow teeth gnashing at us in thelight of our lantern.
It was well that we had so clear a view of him. Even as we looked heplucked out from under his covering a short, round piece of wood,like a school-ruler, and clapped it to his lips. Our pistols rang outtogether. He whirled round, threw up his arms, and with a kind ofchoking cough fell sideways into the stream. I caught one glimpse ofhis venomous, menacing eyes amid the white swirl of the waters. Atthe same moment the wooden-legged man threw himself upon the rudderand put it hard down, so that his boat made straight in for thesouthern bank, while we shot past her stern, only clearing her by afew feet. We were round after her in an instant, but she was alreadynearly at the bank. It was a wild and desolate place, where the moonglimmered upon a wide expanse of marsh-land, with pools of stagnantwater and beds of decaying vegetation. The launch with a dull thudran up upon the mud-bank, with her bow in the air and her stern flushwith the water. The fugitive sprang out, but his stump instantly sankits whole length into the sodden soil. In vain he struggled andwrithed. Not one step could he possibly take either forwards orbackwards. He yelled in impotent rage, and kicked frantically intothe mud with his other foot, but his struggles only bored his woodenpin the deeper into the sticky bank. When we brought our launchalongside he was so firmly anchored that it was only by throwing theend of a rope over his shoulders that we were able to haul him out,and to drag him, like some evil fish, over our side. The two Smiths,father and son, sat sullenly in their launch, but came aboard meeklyenough when commanded. The Aurora herself we hauled off and made fastto our stern. A solid iron chest of Indian workmanship stood upon thedeck. This, there could be no question, was the same that hadcontained the ill-omened treasure of the Sholtos. There was no key,but it was of considerable weight, so we transferred it carefully toour own little cabin. As we steamed slowly up-stream again, weflashed our search-light in every direction, but there was no sign ofthe Islander. Somewhere in the dark ooze at the bottom of the Thameslie the bones of that strange visitor to our shores.
"See here," said Holmes, pointing to the wooden hatchway. "We werehardly quick enough with our pistols." There, sure enough, justbehind where we had been standing, stuck one of those murderous dartswhich we knew so well. It must have whizzed between us at the instantthat we fired. Holmes smiled at it and shrugged his shoulders in hiseasy fashion, but I confess that it turned me sick to think of thehorrible death which had passed so close to us that night.




     CHAPTER XI     The Great Agra Treasure

Our captive sat in the cabin opposite to the iron box which he haddone so much and waited so long to gain. He was a sunburned,reckless-eyed fellow, with a net-work of lines and wrinkles all overhis mahogany features, which told of a hard, open-air life. There wasa singular prominence about his bearded chin which marked a man whowas not to be easily turned from his purpose. His age may have beenfifty or thereabouts, for his black, curly hair was thickly shot withgray. His face in repose was not an unpleasing one, though his heavybrows and aggressive chin gave him, as I had lately seen, a terribleexpression when moved to anger. He sat now with his handcuffed handsupon his lap, and his head sunk upon his breast, while he looked withhis keen, twinkling eyes at the box which had been the cause of hisill-doings. It seemed to me that there was more sorrow than anger inhis rigid and contained countenance. Once he looked up at me with agleam of something like humour in his eyes.
"Well, Jonathan Small," said Holmes, lighting a cigar, "I am sorrythat it has come to this."
"And so am I, sir," he answered, frankly. "I don't believe that I canswing over the job. I give you my word on the book that I neverraised hand against Mr. Sholto. It was that little hell-hound Tongawho shot one of his cursed darts into him. I had no part in it, sir.I was as grieved as if it had been my blood-relation. I welted thelittle devil with the slack end of the rope for it, but it was done,and I could not undo it again."
"Have a cigar," said Holmes; "and you had best take a pull out of myflask, for you are very wet. How could you expect so small and weak aman as this black fellow to overpower Mr. Sholto and hold him whileyou were climbing the rope?"
"You seem to know as much about it as if you were there, sir. Thetruth is that I hoped to find the room clear. I knew the habits ofthe house pretty well, and it was the time when Mr. Sholto usuallywent down to his supper. I shall make no secret of the business. Thebest defence that I can make is just the simple truth. Now, if it hadbeen the old major I would have swung for him with a light heart. Iwould have thought no more of knifing him than of smoking this cigar.But it's cursed hard that I should be lagged over this young Sholto,with whom I had no quarrel whatever."
"You are under the charge of Mr. Athelney Jones, of Scotland Yard. Heis going to bring you up to my rooms, and I shall ask you for a trueaccount of the matter. You must make a clean breast of it, for if youdo I hope that I may be of use to you.  I think I can prove that thepoison acts so quickly that the man was dead before ever you reachedthe room."
"That he was, sir. I never got such a turn in my life as when I sawhim grinning at me with his head on his shoulder as I climbed throughthe window. It fairly shook me, sir. I'd have half killed Tonga forit if he had not scrambled off. That was how he came to leave hisclub, and some of his darts too, as he tells me, which I dare sayhelped to put you on our track; though how you kept on it is morethan I can tell. I don't feel no malice against you for it. But itdoes seem a queer thing," he added, with a bitter smile, "that I whohave a fair claim to nigh upon half a million of money should spendthe first half of my life building a breakwater in the Andamans, andam like to spend the other half digging drains at Dartmoor. It was anevil day for me when first I clapped eyes upon the merchant Achmetand had to do with the Agra treasure, which never brought anythingbut a curse yet upon the man who owned it. To him it brought murder,to Major Sholto it brought fear and guilt, to me it has meant slaveryfor life."
At this moment Athelney Jones thrust his broad face and heavyshoulders into the tiny cabin. "Quite a family party," he remarked."I think I shall have a pull at that flask, Holmes.  Well, I think wemay all congratulate each other. Pity we didn't take the other alive;but there was no choice. I say, Holmes, you must confess that you cutit rather fine. It was all we could do to overhaul her."
"All is well that ends well," said Holmes. "But I certainly did notknow that the Aurora was such a clipper."
"Smith says she is one of the fastest launches on the river, and thatif he had had another man to help him with the engines we shouldnever have caught her. He swears he knew nothing of this Norwoodbusiness."
"Neither he did," cried our prisoner,--"not a word. I chose hislaunch because I heard that she was a flier. We told him nothing, butwe paid him well, and he was to get something handsome if we reachedour vessel, the Esmeralda, at Gravesend, outward bound for theBrazils."
"Well, if he has done no wrong we shall see that no wrong comes tohim. If we are pretty quick in catching our men, we are not so quickin condemning them." It was amusing to notice how the consequentialJones was already beginning to give himself airs on the strength ofthe capture. From the slight smile which played over SherlockHolmes's face, I could see that the speech had not been lost uponhim.
"We will be at Vauxhall Bridge presently," said Jones, "and shallland you, Dr. Watson, with the treasure-box. I need hardly tell youthat I am taking a very grave responsibility upon myself in doingthis. It is most irregular; but of course an agreement is anagreement. I must, however, as a matter of duty, send an inspectorwith you, since you have so valuable a charge. You will drive, nodoubt?"
"Yes, I shall drive."
"It is a pity there is no key, that we may make an inventory first.You will have to break it open. Where is the key, my man?"
"At the bottom of the river," said Small, shortly.
"Hum! There was no use your giving this unnecessary trouble. We havehad work enough already through you. However, doctor, I need not warnyou to be careful. Bring the box back with you to the Baker Streetrooms. You will find us there, on our way to the station."
They landed me at Vauxhall, with my heavy iron box, and with a bluff,genial inspector as my companion. A quarter of an hour's drivebrought us to Mrs. Cecil Forrester's. The servant seemed surprised atso late a visitor. Mrs. Cecil Forrester was out for the evening, sheexplained, and likely to be very late. Miss Morstan, however, was inthe drawing-room: so to the drawing-room I went, box in hand, leavingthe obliging inspector in the cab.
She was seated by the open window, dressed in some sort of whitediaphanous material, with a little touch of scarlet at the neck andwaist. The soft light of a shaded lamp fell upon her as she leanedback in the basket chair, playing over her sweet, grave face, andtinting with a dull, metallic sparkle the rich coils of her luxurianthair. One white arm and hand drooped over the side of the chair, andher whole pose and figure spoke of an absorbing melancholy. At thesound of my foot-fall she sprang to her feet, however, and a brightflush of surprise and of pleasure colored her pale cheeks.
"I heard a cab drive up," she said. "I thought that Mrs. Forresterhad come back very early, but I never dreamed that it might be you.What news have you brought me?"
"I have brought something better than news," said I, putting down thebox upon the table and speaking jovially and boisterously, though myheart was heavy within me. "I have brought you something which isworth all the news in the world. I have brought you a fortune."
She glanced at iron box. "Is that the treasure, then?" she asked,coolly enough.
"Yes, this is the great Agra treasure. Half of it is yours and halfis Thaddeus Sholto's. You will have a couple of hundred thousandeach. Think of that! An annuity of ten thousand pounds. There will befew richer young ladies in England. Is it not glorious?"
I think that I must have been rather overacting my delight, and thatshe detected a hollow ring in my congratulations, for I saw hereyebrows rise a little, and she glanced at me curiously.
"If I have it," said she, "I owe it to you."
"No, no," I answered, "not to me, but to my friend Sherlock Holmes.With all the will in the world, I could never have followed up a cluewhich has taxed even his analytical genius.  As it was, we verynearly lost it at the last moment."
"Pray sit down and tell me all about it, Dr. Watson," said she.
I narrated briefly what had occurred since I had seen herlast,--Holmes's new method of search, the discovery of the Aurora,the appearance of Athelney Jones, our expedition in the evening, andthe wild chase down the Thames. She listened with parted lips andshining eyes to my recital of our adventures. When I spoke of thedart which had so narrowly missed us, she turned so white that Ifeared that she was about to faint.
"It is nothing," she said, as I hastened to pour her out some water."I am all right again. It was a shock to me to hear that I had placedmy friends in such horrible peril."
"That is all over," I answered. "It was nothing. I will tell you nomore gloomy details. Let us turn to something brighter. There is thetreasure. What could be brighter than that? I got leave to bring itwith me, thinking that it would interest you to be the first to seeit."
"It would be of the greatest interest to me," she said. There was noeagerness in her voice, however. It had struck her, doubtless, thatit might seem ungracious upon her part to be indifferent to a prizewhich had cost so much to win.
"What a pretty box!" she said, stooping over it. "This is Indianwork, I suppose?"
"Yes; it is Benares metal-work."
"And so heavy!" she exclaimed, trying to raise it. "The box alonemust be of some value. Where is the key?"
"Small threw it into the Thames," I answered. "I must borrow Mrs.Forrester's poker." There was in the front a thick and broad hasp,wrought in the image of a sitting Buddha. Under this I thrust the endof the poker and twisted it outward as a lever. The hasp sprang openwith a loud snap. With trembling fingers I flung back the lid. Weboth stood gazing in astonishment. The box was empty!
No wonder that it was heavy. The iron-work was two-thirds of an inchthick all round. It was massive, well made, and solid, like a chestconstructed to carry things of great price, but not one shred orcrumb of metal or jewelry lay within it. It was absolutely andcompletely empty.
"The treasure is lost," said Miss Morstan, calmly.
As I listened to the words and realized what they meant, a greatshadow seemed to pass from my soul. I did not know how this Agratreasure had weighed me down, until now that it was finally removed.It was selfish, no doubt, disloyal, wrong, but I could realizenothing save that the golden barrier was gone from between us. "ThankGod!" I ejaculated from my very heart.
She looked at me with a quick, questioning smile. "Why do you saythat?" she asked.
"Because you are within my reach again," I said, taking her hand. Shedid not withdraw it. "Because I love you, Mary, as truly as ever aman loved a woman. Because this treasure, these riches, sealed mylips. Now that they are gone I can tell you how I love you. That iswhy I said, 'Thank God.'"
"Then I say, 'Thank God,' too," she whispered, as I drew her to myside. Whoever had lost a treasure, I knew that night that I hadgained one.




     CHAPTER XII     The Strange Story of Jonathan Small

A very patient man was that inspector in the cab, for it was a wearytime before I rejoined him. His face clouded over when I showed himthe empty box.
"There goes the reward!" said he, gloomily. "Where there is no moneythere is no pay. This night's work would have been worth a tennereach to Sam Brown and me if the treasure had been there."
"Mr. Thaddeus Sholto is a rich man," I said. "He will see that youare rewarded, treasure or no."
The inspector shook his head despondently, however. "It's a bad job,"he repeated; "and so Mr. Athelney Jones will think."
His forecast proved to be correct, for the detective looked blankenough when I got to Baker Street and showed him the empty box. Theyhad only just arrived, Holmes, the prisoner, and he, for they hadchanged their plans so far as to report themselves at a station uponthe way. My companion lounged in his arm-chair with his usuallistless expression, while Small sat stolidly opposite to him withhis wooden leg cocked over his sound one. As I exhibited the emptybox he leaned back in his chair and laughed aloud.
"This is your doing, Small," said Athelney Jones, angrily.
"Yes, I have put it away where you shall never lay hand upon it," hecried, exultantly. "It is my treasure; and if I can't have the lootI'll take darned good care that no one else does. I tell you that noliving man has any right to it, unless it is three men who are in theAndaman convict-barracks and myself. I know now that I cannot havethe use of it, and I know that they cannot. I have acted all throughfor them as much as for myself. It's been the sign of four with usalways. Well I know that they would have had me do just what I havedone, and throw the treasure into the Thames rather than let it go tokith or kin of Sholto or of Morstan. It was not to make them richthat we did for Achmet. You'll find the treasure where the key is,and where little Tonga is. When I saw that your launch must catch us,I put the loot away in a safe place. There are no rupees for you thisjourney."
"You are deceiving us, Small," said Athelney Jones, sternly. "If youhad wished to throw the treasure into the Thames it would have beeneasier for you to have thrown box and all."
"Easier for me to throw, and easier for you to recover," he answered,with a shrewd, sidelong look. "The man that was clever enough to huntme down is clever enough to pick an iron box from the bottom of ariver. Now that they are scattered over five miles or so, it may be aharder job. It went to my heart to do it, though. I was half mad whenyou came up with us. However, there's no good grieving over it. I'vehad ups in my life, and I've had downs, but I've learned not to cryover spilled milk."
"This is a very serious matter, Small," said the detective. "If youhad helped justice, instead of thwarting it in this way, you wouldhave had a better chance at your trial."
"Justice!" snarled the ex-convict. "A pretty justice! Whose loot isthis, if it is not ours? Where is the justice that I should give itup to those who have never earned it? Look how I have earned it!Twenty long years in that fever-ridden swamp, all day at work underthe mangrove-tree, all night chained up in the filthy convict-huts,bitten by mosquitoes, racked with ague, bullied by every cursedblack-faced policeman who loved to take it out of a white man. Thatwas how I earned the Agra treasure; and you talk to me of justicebecause I cannot bear to feel that I have paid this price only thatanother may enjoy it! I would rather swing a score of times, or haveone of Tonga's darts in my hide, than live in a convict's cell andfeel that another man is at his ease in a palace with the money thatshould be mine." Small had dropped his mask of stoicism, and all thiscame out in a wild whirl of words, while his eyes blazed, and thehandcuffs clanked together with the impassioned movement of hishands. I could understand, as I saw the fury and the passion of theman, that it was no groundless or unnatural terror which hadpossessed Major Sholto when he first learned that the injured convictwas upon his track.
"You forget that we know nothing of all this," said Holmes quietly."We have not heard your story, and we cannot tell how far justice mayoriginally have been on your side."
"Well, sir, you have been very fair-spoken to me, though I can seethat I have you to thank that I have these bracelets upon my wrists.Still, I bear no grudge for that. It is all fair and above-board. Ifyou want to hear my story I have no wish to hold it back. What I sayto you is God's truth, every word of it. Thank you; you can put theglass beside me here, and I'll put my lips to it if I am dry.
"I am a Worcestershire man myself,--born near Pershore. I dare sayyou would find a heap of Smalls living there now if you were to look.I have often thought of taking a look round there, but the truth isthat I was never much of a credit to the family, and I doubt if theywould be so very glad to see me. They were all steady, chapel-goingfolk, small farmers, well known and respected over the country-side,while I was always a bit of a rover. At last, however, when I wasabout eighteen, I gave them no more trouble, for I got into a messover a girl, and could only get out of it again by taking the queen'sshilling and joining the 3d Buffs, which was just starting for India.
"I wasn't destined to do much soldiering, however. I had just gotpast the goose-step, and learned to handle my musket, when I was foolenough to go swimming in the Ganges. Luckily for me, my companysergeant, John Holder, was in the water at the same time, and he wasone of the finest swimmers in the service. A crocodile took me, justas I was half-way across, and nipped off my right leg as clean as asurgeon could have done it, just above the knee. What with the shockand the loss of blood, I fainted, and should have drowned if Holderhad not caught hold of me and paddled for the bank. I was five monthsin hospital over it, and when at last I was able to limp out of itwith this timber toe strapped to my stump I found myself invalidedout of the army and unfitted for any active occupation.
"I was, as you can imagine, pretty down on my luck at this time, forI was a useless cripple though not yet in my twentieth year. However,my misfortune soon proved to be a blessing in disguise. A man namedAbelwhite, who had come out there as an indigo-planter, wanted anoverseer to look after his coolies and keep them up to their work. Hehappened to be a friend of our colonel's, who had taken an interestin me since the accident. To make a long story short, the colonelrecommended me strongly for the post and, as the work was mostly tobe done on horseback, my leg was no great obstacle, for I had enoughknee left to keep good grip on the saddle. What I had to do was toride over the plantation, to keep an eye on the men as they worked,and to report the idlers. The pay was fair, I had comfortablequarters, and altogether I was content to spend the remainder of mylife in indigo-planting. Mr. Abelwhite was a kind man, and he wouldoften drop into my little shanty and smoke a pipe with me, for whitefolk out there feel their hearts warm to each other as they never dohere at home.
"Well, I was never in luck's way long. Suddenly, without a note ofwarning, the great mutiny broke upon us. One month India lay as stilland peaceful, to all appearance, as Surrey or Kent; the next therewere two hundred thousand black devils let loose, and the country wasa perfect hell. Of course you know all about it, gentlemen,--a dealmore than I do, very like, since reading is not in my line. I onlyknow what I saw with my own eyes. Our plantation was at a placecalled Muttra, near the border of the Northwest Provinces. Nightafter night the whole sky was alight with the burning bungalows, andday after day we had small companies of Europeans passing through ourestate with their wives and children, on their way to Agra, wherewere the nearest troops. Mr. Abelwhite was an obstinate man. He hadit in his head that the affair had been exaggerated, and that itwould blow over as suddenly as it had sprung up. There he sat on hisveranda, drinking whiskey-pegs and smoking cheroots, while thecountry was in a blaze about him. Of course we stuck by him, I andDawson, who, with his wife, used to do the book-work and themanaging. Well, one fine day the crash came. I had been away on adistant plantation, and was riding slowly home in the evening, whenmy eye fell upon something all huddled together at the bottom of asteep nullah. I rode down to see what it was, and the cold struckthrough my heart when I found it was Dawson's wife, all cut intoribbons, and half eaten by jackals and native dogs. A little furtherup the road Dawson himself was lying on his face, quite dead, with anempty revolver in his hand and four Sepoys lying across each other infront of him. I reined up my horse, wondering which way I shouldturn, but at that moment I saw thick smoke curling up fromAbelwhite's bungalow and the flames beginning to burst through theroof. I knew then that I could do my employer no good, but would onlythrow my own life away if I meddled in the matter. From where I stoodI could see hundreds of the black fiends, with their red coats stillon their backs, dancing and howling round the burning house. Some ofthem pointed at me, and a couple of bullets sang past my head; so Ibroke away across the paddy-fields, and found myself late at nightsafe within the walls at Agra.
"As it proved, however, there was no great safety there, either. Thewhole country was up like a swarm of bees. Wherever the English couldcollect in little bands they held just the ground that their gunscommanded. Everywhere else they were helpless fugitives. It was afight of the millions against the hundreds; and the cruellest part ofit was that these men that we fought against, foot, horse, andgunners, were our own picked troops, whom we had taught and trained,handling our own weapons, and blowing our own bugle-calls. At Agrathere were the 3d Bengal Fusiliers, some Sikhs, two troops of horse,and a battery of artillery. A volunteer corps of clerks and merchantshad been formed, and this I joined, wooden leg and all. We went outto meet the rebels at Shahgunge early in July, and we beat them backfor a time, but our powder gave out, and we had to fall back upon thecity. Nothing but the worst news came to us from every side,--whichis not to be wondered at, for if you look at the map you will seethat we were right in the heart of it. Lucknow is rather better thana hundred miles to the east, and Cawnpore about as far to the south.From every point on the compass there was nothing but torture andmurder and outrage.
"The city of Agra is a great place, swarming with fanatics and fiercedevil-worshippers of all sorts. Our handful of men were lost amongthe narrow, winding streets. Our leader moved across the river,therefore, and took up his position in the old fort at Agra. I don'tknow if any of you gentlemen have ever read or heard anything of thatold fort. It is a very queer place,--the queerest that ever I was in,and I have been in some rum corners, too. First of all, it isenormous in size. I should think that the enclosure must be acres andacres. There is a modern part, which took all our garrison, women,children, stores, and everything else, with plenty of room over. Butthe modern part is nothing like the size of the old quarter, wherenobody goes, and which is given over to the scorpions and thecentipedes. It is all full of great deserted halls, and windingpassages, and long corridors twisting in and out, so that it is easyenough for folk to get lost in it. For this reason it was seldom thatany one went into it, though now and again a party with torches mightgo exploring.
"The river washes along the front of the old fort, and so protectsit, but on the sides and behind there are many doors, and these hadto be guarded, of course, in the old quarter as well as in that whichwas actually held by our troops. We were short-handed, with hardlymen enough to man the angles of the building and to serve the guns.It was impossible for us, therefore, to station a strong guard atevery one of the innumerable gates. What we did was to organize acentral guard-house in the middle of the fort, and to leave each gateunder the charge of one white man and two or three natives. I wasselected to take charge during certain hours of the night of a smallisolated door upon the southwest side of the building. Two Sikhtroopers were placed under my command, and I was instructed ifanything went wrong to fire my musket, when I might rely upon helpcoming at once from the central guard. As the guard was a good twohundred paces away, however, and as the space between was cut up intoa labyrinth of passages and corridors, I had great doubts as towhether they could arrive in time to be of any use in case of anactual attack.
"Well, I was pretty proud at having this small command given me,since I was a raw recruit, and a game-legged one at that. For twonights I kept the watch with my Punjaubees. They were tall,fierce-looking chaps, Mahomet Singh and Abdullah Khan by name, bothold fighting-men who had borne arms against us at Chilian-wallah.They could talk English pretty well, but I could get little out ofthem. They preferred to stand together and jabber all night in theirqueer Sikh lingo. For myself, I used to stand outside the gate-way,looking down on the broad, winding river and on the twinkling lightsof the great city. The beating of drums, the rattle of tomtoms, andthe yells and howls of the rebels, drunk with opium and with bang,were enough to remind us all night of our dangerous neighbors acrossthe stream. Every two hours the officer of the night used to comeround to all the posts, to make sure that all was well.
"The third night of my watch was dark and dirty, with a small,driving rain. It was dreary work standing in the gate-way hour afterhour in such weather. I tried again and again to make my Sikhs talk,but without much success. At two in the morning the rounds passed,and broke for a moment the weariness of the night. Finding that mycompanions would not be led into conversation, I took out my pipe,and laid down my musket to strike the match. In an instant the twoSikhs were upon me. One of them snatched my firelock up and levelledit at my head, while the other held a great knife to my throat andswore between his teeth that he would plunge it into me if I moved astep.
"My first thought was that these fellows were in league with therebels, and that this was the beginning of an assault. If our doorwere in the hands of the Sepoys the place must fall, and the womenand children be treated as they were in Cawnpore. Maybe you gentlementhink that I am just making out a case for myself, but I give you myword that when I thought of that, though I felt the point of theknife at my throat, I opened my mouth with the intention of giving ascream, if it was my last one, which might alarm the main guard. Theman who held me seemed to know my thoughts; for, even as I bracedmyself to it, he whispered, 'Don't make a noise. The fort is safeenough. There are no rebel dogs on this side of the river.' There wasthe ring of truth in what he said, and I knew that if I raised myvoice I was a dead man. I could read it in the fellow's brown eyes. Iwaited, therefore, in silence, to see what it was that they wantedfrom me.
"'Listen to me, Sahib,' said the taller and fiercer of the pair, theone whom they called Abdullah Khan. 'You must either be with us nowor you must be silenced forever. The thing is too great a one for usto hesitate. Either you are heart and soul with us on your oath onthe cross of the Christians, or your body this night shall be throwninto the ditch and we shall pass over to our brothers in the rebelarmy. There is no middle way. Which is it to be, death or life? Wecan only give you three minutes to decide, for the time is passing,and all must be done before the rounds come again.'
"'How can I decide?' said I. 'You have not told me what you want ofme. But I tell you now that if it is anything against the safety ofthe fort I will have no truck with it, so you can drive home yourknife and welcome.'
"'It is nothing against the fort,' said he. 'We only ask you to dothat which your countrymen come to this land for. We ask you to berich. If you will be one of us this night, we will swear to you uponthe naked knife, and by the threefold oath which no Sikh was everknown to break, that you shall have your fair share of the loot. Aquarter of the treasure shall be yours. We can say no fairer.'
"'But what is the treasure, then?' I asked. 'I am as ready to be richas you can be, if you will but show me how it can be done.'
"'You will swear, then,' said he, 'by the bones of your father, bythe honor of your mother, by the cross of your faith, to raise nohand and speak no word against us, either now or afterwards?'
"'I will swear it,' I answered, 'provided that the fort is notendangered.'
"'Then my comrade and I will swear that you shall have a quarter ofthe treasure which shall be equally divided among the four of us.'
"'There are but three,' said I.
"'No; Dost Akbar must have his share. We can tell the tale to youwhile we await them. Do you stand at the gate, Mahomet Singh, andgive notice of their coming. The thing stands thus, Sahib, and I tellit to you because I know that an oath is binding upon a Feringhee,and that we may trust you. Had you been a lying Hindoo, though youhad sworn by all the gods in their false temples, your blood wouldhave been upon the knife, and your body in the water. But the Sikhknows the Englishman, and the Englishman knows the Sikh. Hearken,then, to what I have to say.
"'There is a rajah in the northern provinces who has much wealth,though his lands are small. Much has come to him from his father, andmore still he has set by himself, for he is of a low nature andhoards his gold rather than spend it. When the troubles broke out hewould be friends both with the lion and the tiger,--with the Sepoyand with the Company's raj. Soon, however, it seemed to him that thewhite men's day was come, for through all the land he could hear ofnothing but of their death and their overthrow. Yet, being a carefulman, he made such plans that, come what might, half at least of histreasure should be left to him. That which was in gold and silver hekept by him in the vaults of his palace, but the most precious stonesand the choicest pearls that he had he put in an iron box, and sentit by a trusty servant who, under the guise of a merchant, shouldtake it to the fort at Agra, there to lie until the land is at peace.Thus, if the rebels won he would have his money, but if the Companyconquered his jewels would be saved to him. Having thus divided hishoard, he threw himself into the cause of the Sepoys, since they werestrong upon his borders. By doing this, mark you, Sahib, his propertybecomes the due of those who have been true to their salt.
"'This pretended merchant, who travels under the name of Achmet, isnow in the city of Agra, and desires to gain his way into the fort.He has with him as travelling-companion my foster-brother Dost Akbar,who knows his secret. Dost Akbar has promised this night to lead himto a side-postern of the fort, and has chosen this one for hispurpose. Here he will come presently, and here he will find MahometSingh and myself awaiting him. The place is lonely, and none shallknow of his coming. The world shall know of the merchant Achmet nomore, but the great treasure of the rajah shall be divided among us.What say you to it, Sahib?'
"In Worcestershire the life of a man seems a great and a sacredthing; but it is very different when there is fire and blood allround you and you have been used to meeting death at every turn.Whether Achmet the merchant lived or died was a thing as light as airto me, but at the talk about the treasure my heart turned to it, andI thought of what I might do in the old country with it, and how myfolk would stare when they saw their ne'er-do-well coming back withhis pockets full of gold moidores. I had, therefore, already made upmy mind. Abdullah Khan, however, thinking that I hesitated, pressedthe matter more closely.
"'Consider, Sahib,' said he, 'that if this man is taken by thecommandant he will be hung or shot, and his jewels taken by thegovernment, so that no man will be a rupee the better for them. Now,since we do the taking of him, why should we not do the rest as well?The jewels will be as well with us as in the Company's coffers. Therewill be enough to make every one of us rich men and great chiefs. Noone can know about the matter, for here we are cut off from all men.What could be better for the purpose?  Say again, then, Sahib,whether you are with us, or if we must look upon you as an enemy.'
"'I am with you heart and soul,' said I.
"'It is well,' he answered, handing me back my firelock. 'You seethat we trust you, for your word, like ours, is not to be broken. Wehave now only to wait for my brother and the merchant.'
"'Does your brother know, then, of what you will do?' I asked.
"'The plan is his. He has devised it. We will go to the gate andshare the watch with Mahomet Singh.'
"The rain was still falling steadily, for it was just the beginningof the wet season. Brown, heavy clouds were drifting across the sky,and it was hard to see more than a stone-cast. A deep moat lay infront of our door, but the water was in places nearly dried up, andit could easily be crossed. It was strange to me to be standing therewith those two wild Punjaubees waiting for the man who was coming tohis death.
"Suddenly my eye caught the glint of a shaded lantern at the otherside of the moat. It vanished among the mound-heaps, and thenappeared again coming slowly in our direction.
"'Here they are!' I exclaimed.
"'You will challenge him, Sahib, as usual,' whispered Abdullah. 'Givehim no cause for fear. Send us in with him, and we shall do the restwhile you stay here on guard. Have the lantern ready to uncover, thatwe may be sure that it is indeed the man.'
"The light had flickered onwards, now stopping and now advancing,until I could see two dark figures upon the other side of the moat. Ilet them scramble down the sloping bank, splash through the mire, andclimb half-way up to the gate, before I challenged them.
"'Who goes there?' said I, in a subdued voice.
"'Friends,' came the answer. I uncovered my lantern and threw a floodof light upon them. The first was an enormous Sikh, with a blackbeard which swept nearly down to his cummerbund. Outside of a show Ihave never seen so tall a man. The other was a little, fat, roundfellow, with a great yellow turban, and a bundle in his hand, done upin a shawl. He seemed to be all in a quiver with fear, for his handstwitched as if he had the ague, and his head kept turning to left andright with two bright little twinkling eyes, like a mouse when heventures out from his hole. It gave me the chills to think of killinghim, but I thought of the treasure, and my heart set as hard as aflint within me. When he saw my white face he gave a little chirrupof joy and came running up towards me.
"'Your protection, Sahib,' he panted,--'your protection for theunhappy merchant Achmet. I have travelled across Rajpootana that Imight seek the shelter of the fort at Agra. I have been robbed andbeaten and abused because I have been the friend of the Company. Itis a blessed night this when I am once more in safety,--I and my poorpossessions.'
"'What have you in the bundle?' I asked.
"'An iron box,' he answered, 'which contains one or two little familymatters which are of no value to others, but which I should be sorryto lose. Yet I am not a beggar; and I shall reward you, young Sahib,and your governor also, if he will give me the shelter I ask.'
"I could not trust myself to speak longer with the man. The more Ilooked at his fat, frightened face, the harder did it seem that weshould slay him in cold blood. It was best to get it over.
"'Take him to the main guard,' said I. The two Sikhs closed in uponhim on each side, and the giant walked behind, while they marched inthrough the dark gate-way. Never was a man so compassed round withdeath. I remained at the gate-way with the lantern.
"I could hear the measured tramp of their footsteps sounding throughthe lonely corridors. Suddenly it ceased, and I heard voices, and ascuffle, with the sound of blows. A moment later there came, to myhorror, a rush of footsteps coming in my direction, with the loudbreathing of a running man. I turned my lantern down the long,straight passage, and there was the fat man, running like the wind,with a smear of blood across his face, and close at his heels,bounding like a tiger, the great black-bearded Sikh, with a knifeflashing in his hand. I have never seen a man run so fast as thatlittle merchant. He was gaining on the Sikh, and I could see that ifhe once passed me and got to the open air he would save himself yet.My heart softened to him, but again the thought of his treasureturned me hard and bitter. I cast my firelock between his legs as heraced past, and he rolled twice over like a shot rabbit. Ere he couldstagger to his feet the Sikh was upon him, and buried his knife twicein his side. The man never uttered moan nor moved muscle, but laywere he had fallen. I think myself that he may have broken his neckwith the fall. You see, gentlemen, that I am keeping my promise. I amtelling you every work of the business just exactly as it happened,whether it is in my favor or not."
He stopped, and held out his manacled hands for the whiskey-and-waterwhich Holmes had brewed for him. For myself, I confess that I had nowconceived the utmost horror of the man, not only for thiscold-blooded business in which he had been concerned, but even morefor the somewhat flippant and careless way in which he narrated it.Whatever punishment was in store for him, I felt that he might expectno sympathy from me. Sherlock Holmes and Jones sat with their handsupon their knees, deeply interested in the story, but with the samedisgust written upon their faces.  He may have observed it, for therewas a touch of defiance in his voice and manner as he proceeded.
"It was all very bad, no doubt," said he. "I should like to know howmany fellows in my shoes would have refused a share of this loot whenthey knew that they would have their throats cut for their pains.Besides, it was my life or his when once he was in the fort. If hehad got out, the whole business would come to light, and I shouldhave been court-martialled and shot as likely as not; for people werenot very lenient at a time like that."
"Go on with your story," said Holmes, shortly.
"Well, we carried him in, Abdullah, Akbar, and I. A fine weight hewas, too, for all that he was so short. Mahomet Singh was left toguard the door. We took him to a place which the Sikhs had alreadyprepared. It was some distance off, where a winding passage leads toa great empty hall, the brick walls of which were all crumbling topieces. The earth floor had sunk in at one place, making a naturalgrave, so we left Achmet the merchant there, having first covered himover with loose bricks. This done, we all went back to the treasure.
"It lay where he had dropped it when he was first attacked. The boxwas the same which now lies open upon your table. A key was hung by asilken cord to that carved handle upon the top. We opened it, and thelight of the lantern gleamed upon a collection of gems such as I haveread of and thought about when I was a little lad at Pershore. It wasblinding to look upon them. When we had feasted our eyes we took themall out and made a list of them. There were one hundred andforty-three diamonds of the first water, including one which has beencalled, I believe, 'the Great Mogul' and is said to be the secondlargest stone in existence. Then there were ninety-seven very fineemeralds, and one hundred and seventy rubies, some of which, however,were small. There were forty carbuncles, two hundred and tensapphires, sixty-one agates, and a great quantity of beryls, onyxes,cats'-eyes, turquoises, and other stones, the very names of which Idid not know at the time, though I have become more familiar withthem since. Besides this, there were nearly three hundred very finepearls, twelve of which were set in a gold coronet. By the way, theselast had been taken out of the chest and were not there when Irecovered it.
"After we had counted our treasures we put them back into the chestand carried them to the gate-way to show them to Mahomet Singh. Thenwe solemnly renewed our oath to stand by each other and be true toour secret. We agreed to conceal our loot in a safe place until thecountry should be at peace again, and then to divide it equally amongourselves. There was no use dividing it at present, for if gems ofsuch value were found upon us it would cause suspicion, and there wasno privacy in the fort nor any place where we could keep them. Wecarried the box, therefore, into the same hall where we had buriedthe body, and there, under certain bricks in the best-preserved wall,we made a hollow and put our treasure. We made careful note of theplace, and next day I drew four plans, one for each of us, and putthe sign of the four of us at the bottom, for we had sworn that weshould each always act for all, so that none might take advantage.That is an oath that I can put my hand to my heart and swear that Ihave never broken.
"Well, there's no use my telling you gentlemen what came of theIndian mutiny. After Wilson took Delhi and Sir Colin relieved Lucknowthe back of the business was broken. Fresh troops came pouring in,and Nana Sahib made himself scarce over the frontier. A flying columnunder Colonel Greathed came round to Agra and cleared the Pandiesaway from it. Peace seemed to be settling upon the country, and wefour were beginning to hope that the time was at hand when we mightsafely go off with our shares of the plunder. In a moment, however,our hopes were shattered by our being arrested as the murderers ofAchmet.
"It came about in this way. When the rajah put his jewels into thehands of Achmet he did it because he knew that he was a trusty man.They are suspicious folk in the East, however: so what does thisrajah do but take a second even more trusty servant and set him toplay the spy upon the first? This second man was ordered never to letAchmet out of his sight, and he followed him like his shadow. He wentafter him that night and saw him pass through the doorway. Of coursehe thought he had taken refuge in the fort, and applied for admissionthere himself next day, but could find no trace of Achmet. Thisseemed to him so strange that he spoke about it to a sergeant ofguides, who brought it to the ears of the commandant. A thoroughsearch was quickly made, and the body was discovered. Thus at thevery moment that we thought that all was safe we were all four seizedand brought to trial on a charge of murder,--three of us because wehad held the gate that night, and the fourth because he was known tohave been in the company of the murdered man. Not a word about thejewels came out at the trial, for the rajah had been deposed anddriven out of India: so no one had any particular interest in them.The murder, however, was clearly made out, and it was certain that wemust all have been concerned in it. The three Sikhs got penalservitude for life, and I was condemned to death, though my sentencewas afterwards commuted into the same as the others.
"It was rather a queer position that we found ourselves in then.There we were all four tied by the leg and with precious littlechance of ever getting out again, while we each held a secret whichmight have put each of us in a palace if we could only have made useof it. It was enough to make a man eat his heart out to have to standthe kick and the cuff of every petty jack-in-office, to have rice toeat and water to drink, when that gorgeous fortune was ready for himoutside, just waiting to be picked up. It might have driven me mad;but I was always a pretty stubborn one, so I just held on and bidedmy time.
"At last it seemed to me to have come. I was changed from Agra toMadras, and from there to Blair Island in the Andamans. There arevery few white convicts at this settlement, and, as I had behavedwell from the first, I soon found myself a sort of privileged person.I was given a hut in Hope Town, which is a small place on the slopesof Mount Harriet, and I was left pretty much to myself. It is adreary, fever-stricken place, and all beyond our little clearings wasinfested with wild cannibal natives, who were ready enough to blow apoisoned dart at us if they saw a chance. There was digging, andditching, and yam-planting, and a dozen other things to be done, sowe were busy enough all day; though in the evening we had a littletime to ourselves. Among other things, I learned to dispense drugsfor the surgeon, and picked up a smattering of his knowledge. All thetime I was on the lookout for a chance of escape; but it is hundredsof miles from any other land, and there is little or no wind in thoseseas: so it was a terribly difficult job to get away.
"The surgeon, Dr. Somerton, was a fast, sporting young chap, and theother young officers would meet in his rooms of an evening and playcards. The surgery, where I used to make up my drugs, was next to hissitting-room, with a small window between us. Often, if I feltlonesome, I used to turn out the lamp in the surgery, and then,standing there, I could hear their talk and watch their play. I amfond of a hand at cards myself, and it was almost as good as havingone to watch the others. There was Major Sholto, Captain Morstan, andLieutenant Bromley Brown, who were in command of the native troops,and there was the surgeon himself, and two or three prison-officials,crafty old hands who played a nice sly safe game. A very snug littleparty they used to make.
"Well, there was one thing which very soon struck me, and that wasthat the soldiers used always to lose and the civilians to win. Mind,I don't say that there was anything unfair, but so it was. Theseprison-chaps had done little else than play cards ever since they hadbeen at the Andamans, and they knew each other's game to a point,while the others just played to pass the time and threw their cardsdown anyhow. Night after night the soldiers got up poorer men, andthe poorer they got the more keen they were to play. Major Sholto wasthe hardest hit. He used to pay in notes and gold at first, but soonit came to notes of hand and for big sums. He sometimes would win fora few deals, just to give him heart, and then the luck would set inagainst him worse than ever. All day he would wander about as blackas thunder, and he took to drinking a deal more than was good forhim.
"One night he lost even more heavily than usual. I was sitting in myhut when he and Captain Morstan came stumbling along on the way totheir quarters. They were bosom friends, those two, and never farapart. The major was raving about his losses.
"'It's all up, Morstan,' he was saying, as they passed my hut. 'Ishall have to send in my papers. I am a ruined man.'
"'Nonsense, old chap!' said the other, slapping him upon theshoulder. 'I've had a nasty facer myself, but--' That was all I couldhear, but it was enough to set me thinking.
A couple of days later Major Sholto was strolling on the beach: so Itook the chance of speaking to him.
"'I wish to have your advice, major,' said I.
"'Well, Small, what is it?' he asked, taking his cheroot from hislips.
"'I wanted to ask you, sir,' said I, 'who is the proper person towhom hidden treasure should be handed over. I know where half amillion worth lies, and, as I cannot use it myself, I thought perhapsthe best thing that I could do would be to hand it over to the properauthorities, and then perhaps they would get my sentence shortenedfor me.'
"'Half a million, Small?' he gasped, looking hard at me to see if Iwas in earnest.
"'Quite that, sir,--in jewels and pearls. It lies there ready foranyone. And the queer thing about it is that the real owner isoutlawed and cannot hold property, so that it belongs to the firstcomer.'
"'To government, Small,' he stammered,--'to government.' But he saidit in a halting fashion, and I knew in my heart that I had got him.
"'You think, then, sir, that I should give the information to theGovernor-General?' said I, quietly.
"'Well, well, you must not do anything rash, or that you mightrepent. Let me hear all about it, Small. Give me the facts.'
"I told him the whole story, with small changes so that he could notidentify the places. When I had finished he stood stock still andfull of thought. I could see by the twitch of his lip that there wasa struggle going on within him.
"'This is a very important matter, Small,' he said, at last. 'Youmust not say a word to any one about it, and I shall see you againsoon.'
"Two nights later he and his friend Captain Morstan came to my hut inthe dead of the night with a lantern.
"'I want you just to let Captain Morstan hear that story from yourown lips, Small,' said he.
"I repeated it as I had told it before.
"'It rings true, eh?' said he. 'It's good enough to act upon?'
"Captain Morstan nodded.
"'Look here, Small,' said the major. 'We have been talking it over,my friend here and I, and we have come to the conclusion that thissecret of yours is hardly a government matter, after all, but is aprivate concern of your own, which of course you have the power ofdisposing of as you think best. Now, the question is, what pricewould you ask for it? We might be inclined to take it up, and atleast look into it, if we could agree as to terms.' He tried to speakin a cool, careless way, but his eyes were shining with excitementand greed.
"'Why, as to that, gentlemen,' I answered, trying also to be cool,but feeling as excited as he did, 'there is only one bargain which aman in my position can make. I shall want you to help me to myfreedom, and to help my three companions to theirs.  We shall thentake yo into partnership, and give you a fifth share to dividebetween you.'
"'Hum!' said he. 'A fifth share! That is not very tempting.'
"'It would come to fifty thousand apiece,' said I.
"'But how can we gain your freedom? You know very well that you askan impossibility.'
"'Nothing of the sort,' I answered. 'I have thought it all out to thelast detail. The only bar to our escape is that we can get no boatfit for the voyage, and no provisions to last us for so long a time.There are plenty of little yachts and yawls at Calcutta or Madraswhich would serve our turn well. Do you bring one over. We shallengage to get aboard her by night, and if you will drop us on anypart of the Indian coast you will have done your part of thebargain.'
"'If there were only one,' he said.
"'None or all,' I answered. 'We have sworn it. The four of us mustalways act together.'
"'You see, Morstan,' said he, 'Small is a man of his word. He doesnot flinch from his friend. I think we may very well trust him.'
"'It's a dirty business,' the other answered. 'Yet, as you say, themoney would save our commissions handsomely.'
"'Well, Small,' said the major, 'we must, I suppose, try and meetyou. We must first, of course, test the truth of your story. Tell mewhere the box is hid, and I shall get leave of absence and go back toIndia in the monthly relief-boat to inquire into the affair.'
"'Not so fast,' said I, growing colder as he got hot. 'I must havethe consent of my three comrades. I tell you that it is four or nonewith us.'
"'Nonsense!' he broke in. 'What have three black fellows to do withour agreement?'
"'Black or blue,' said I, 'they are in with me, and we all gotogether.'
"Well, the matter ended by a second meeting, at which Mahomet Singh,Abdullah Khan, and Dost Akbar were all present. We talked the matterover again, and at last we came to an arrangement. We were to provideboth the officers with charts of the part of the Agra fort and markthe place in the wall where the treasure was hid. Major Sholto was togo to India to test our story. If he found the box he was to leave itthere, to send out a small yacht provisioned for a voyage, which wasto lie off Rutland Island, and to which we were to make our way, andfinally to return to his duties. Captain Morstan was then to applyfor leave of absence, to meet us at Agra, and there we were to have afinal division of the treasure, he taking the major's share as wellas his own. All this we sealed by the most solemn oaths that the mindcould think or the lips utter. I sat up all night with paper and ink,and by the morning I had the two charts all ready, signed with thesign of four,--that is, of Abdullah, Akbar, Mahomet, and myself.
"Well, gentlemen, I weary you with my long story, and I know that myfriend Mr. Jones is impatient to get me safely stowed in chokey. I'llmake it as short as I can. The villain Sholto went off to India, buthe never came back again. Captain Morstan showed me his name among alist of passengers in one of the mail-boats very shortly afterwards.His uncle had died, leaving him a fortune, and he had left the army,yet he could stoop to treat five men as he had treated us. Morstanwent over to Agra shortly afterwards, and found, as we expected, thatthe treasure was indeed gone. The scoundrel had stolen it all,without carrying out one of the conditions on which we had sold himthe secret. From that day I lived only for vengeance. I thought of itby day and I nursed it by night. It became an overpowering, absorbingpassion with me. I cared nothing for the law,--nothing for thegallows. To escape, to track down Sholto, to have my hand upon histhroat,--that was my one thought. Even the Agra treasure had come tobe a smaller thing in my mind than the slaying of Sholto.
"Well, I have set my mind on many things in this life, and never onewhich I did not carry out. But it was weary years before my timecame. I have told you that I had picked up something of medicine. Oneday when Dr. Somerton was down with a fever a little Andaman Islanderwas picked up by a convict-gang in the woods. He was sick to death,and had gone to a lonely place to die. I took him in hand, though hewas as venomous as a young snake, and after a couple of months I gothim all right and able to walk. He took a kind of fancy to me then,and would hardly go back to his woods, but was always hanging aboutmy hut. I learned a little of his lingo from him, and this made himall the fonder of me.
"Tonga--for that was his name--was a fine boatman, and owned a big,roomy canoe of his own. When I found that he was devoted to me andwould do anything to serve me, I saw my chance of escape. I talked itover with him. He was to bring his boat round on a certain night toan old wharf which was never guarded, and there he was to pick me up.I gave him directions to have several gourds of water and a lot ofyams, cocoa-nuts, and sweet potatoes.
"He was stanch and true, was little Tonga. No man ever had a morefaithful mate. At the night named he had his boat at the wharf. As itchanced, however, there was one of the convict-guard down there,--avile Pathan who had never missed a chance of insulting and injuringme. I had always vowed vengeance, and now I had my chance. It was asif fate had placed him in my way that I might pay my debt before Ileft the island. He stood on the bank with his back to me, and hiscarbine on his shoulder. I looked about for a stone to beat out hisbrains with, but none could I see.
"Then a queer thought came into my head and showed me where I couldlay my hand on a weapon. I sat down in the darkness and unstrapped mywooden leg. With three long hops I was on him. He put his carbine tohis shoulder, but I struck him full, and knocked the whole front ofhis skull in. You can see the split in the wood now where I hit him.We both went down together, for I could not keep my balance, but whenI got up I found him still lying quiet enough. I made for the boat,and in an hour we were well out at sea. Tonga had brought all hisearthly possessions with him, his arms and his gods. Among otherthings, he had a long bamboo spear, and some Andaman cocoa-nutmatting, with which I made a sort of sail. For ten days we werebeating about, trusting to luck, and on the eleventh we were pickedup by a trader which was going from Singapore to Jiddah with a cargoof Malay pilgrims. They were a rum crowd, and Tonga and I soonmanaged to settle down among them. They had one very good quality:they let you alone and asked no questions.
"Well, if I were to tell you all the adventures that my little chumand I went through, you would not thank me, for I would have you hereuntil the sun was shining. Here and there we drifted about the world,something always turning up to keep us from London. All the time,however, I never lost sight of my purpose. I would dream of Sholto atnight. A hundred times I have killed him in my sleep. At last,however, some three or four years ago, we found ourselves in England.I had no great difficulty in finding where Sholto lived, and I set towork to discover whether he had realized the treasure, or if he stillhad it. I made friends with someone who could help me,--I name nonames, for I don't want to get any one else in a hole,--and I soonfound that he still had the jewels. Then I tried to get at him inmany ways; but he was pretty sly, and had always two prize-fighters,besides his sons and his khitmutgar, on guard over him.
"One day, however, I got word that he was dying. I hurried at once tothe garden, mad that he should slip out of my clutches like that,and, looking through the window, I saw him lying in his bed, with hissons on each side of him. I'd have come through and taken my chancewith the three of them, only even as I looked at him his jaw dropped,and I knew that he was gone. I got into his room that same night,though, and I searched his papers to see if there was any record ofwhere he had hidden our jewels. There was not a line, however: so Icame away, bitter and savage as a man could be. Before I left Ibethought me that if I ever met my Sikh friends again it would be asatisfaction to know that I had left some mark of our hatred: so Iscrawled down the sign of the four of us, as it had been on thechart, and I pinned it on his bosom. It was too much that he shouldbe taken to the grave without some token from the men whom he hadrobbed and befooled.
"We earned a living at this time by my exhibiting poor Tonga at fairsand other such places as the black cannibal. He would eat raw meatand dance his war-dance: so we always had a hatful of pennies after aday's work. I still heard all the news from Pondicherry Lodge, andfor some years there was no news to hear, except that they werehunting for the treasure. At last, however, came what we had waitedfor so long. The treasure had been found. It was up at the top of thehouse, in Mr. Bartholomew Sholto's chemical laboratory. I came atonce and had a look at the place, but I could not see how with mywooden leg I was to make my way up to it. I learned, however, about atrap-door in the roof, and also about Mr. Sholto's supper-hour. Itseemed to me that I could manage the thing easily through Tonga. Ibrought him out with me with a long rope wound round his waist. Hecould climb like a cat, and he soon made his way through the roof,but, as ill luck would have it, Bartholomew Sholto was still in theroom, to his cost. Tonga thought he had done something very clever inkilling him, for when I came up by the rope I found him struttingabout as proud as a peacock. Very much surprised was he when I madeat him with the rope's end and cursed him for a little blood-thirstyimp. I took the treasure-box and let it down, and then slid downmyself, having first left the sign of the four upon the table, toshow that the jewels had come back at last to those who had mostright to them. Tonga then pulled up the rope, closed the window, andmade off the way that he had come.
"I don't know that I have anything else to tell you. I had heard awaterman speak of the speed of Smith's launch, the Aurora, so Ithought she would be a handy craft for our escape. I engaged with oldSmith, and was to give him a big sum if he got us safe to our ship.He knew, no doubt, that there was some screw loose, but he was not inour secrets. All this is the truth, and if I tell it to you,gentlemen, it is not to amuse you,--for you have not done me a verygood turn,--but it is because I believe the best defence I can makeis just to hold back nothing, but let all the world know how badly Ihave myself been served by Major Sholto, and how innocent I am of thedeath of his son."
"A very remarkable account," said Sherlock Holmes. "A fitting wind-upto an extremely interesting case. There is nothing at all new to mein the latter part of your narrative, except that you brought yourown rope. That I did not know. By the way, I had hoped that Tonga hadlost all his darts; yet he managed to shoot one at us in the boat."
"He had lost them all, sir, except the one which was in his blow-pipeat the time."
"Ah, of course," said Holmes. "I had not thought of that."
"Is there any other point which you would like to ask about?" askedthe convict, affably.
"I think not, thank you," my companion answered.
"Well, Holmes," said Athelney Jones, "You are a man to be humored,and we all know that you are a connoisseur of crime, but duty isduty, and I have gone rather far in doing what you and your friendasked me. I shall feel more at ease when we have our story-tellerhere safe under lock and key. The cab still waits, and there are twoinspectors down-stairs. I am much obliged to you both for yourassistance. Of course you will be wanted at the trial. Good-night toyou."
"Good-night, gentlemen both," said Jonathan Small.
"You first, Small," remarked the wary Jones as they left the room."I'll take particular care that you don't club me with your woodenleg, whatever you may have done to the gentleman at the AndamanIsles."
"Well, and there is the end of our little drama," I remarked, afterwe had set some time smoking in silence. "I fear that it may be thelast investigation in which I shall have the chance of studying yourmethods. Miss Morstan has done me the honor to accept me as a husbandin prospective."
He gave a most dismal groan. "I feared as much," said he. "I reallycannot congratulate you."
I was a little hurt. "Have you any reason to be dissatisfied with mychoice?" I asked.
"Not at all. I think she is one of the most charming young ladies Iever met, and might have been most useful in such work as we havebeen doing. She had a decided genius that way: witness the way inwhich she preserved that Agra plan from all the other papers of herfather. But love is an emotional thing, and whatever is emotional isopposed to that true cold reason which I place above all things. Ishould never marry myself, lest I bias my judgment."
"I trust," said I, laughing, "that my judgment may survive theordeal. But you look weary."
"Yes, the reaction is already upon me. I shall be as limp as a ragfor a week."
"Strange," said I, "how terms of what in another man I should calllaziness alternate with your fits of splendid energy and vigor."
"Yes," he answered, "there are in me the makings of a very fineloafer and also of a pretty spry sort of fellow. I often think ofthose lines of old Goethe,--
         Schade, da die Natur nur einen Mensch aus Dir schuf,        Denn zum wrdigen Mann war und zum Schelmen der Stoff.
"By the way, a propos of this Norwood business, you see that theyhad, as I surmised, a confederate in the house, who could be noneother than Lal Rao, the butler: so Jones actually has the undividedhonor of having caught one fish in his great haul."
"The division seems rather unfair," I remarked. "You have done allthe work in this business. I get a wife out of it, Jones gets thecredit, pray what remains for you?"
"For me," said Sherlock Holmes, "there still remains thecocaine-bottle." And he stretched his long white hand up for it.





                   THE ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES




                         A SCANDAL IN BOHEMIA




                           Table of contents                                Chapter 1                                Chapter 2                                Chapter 3














     CHAPTER I


To Sherlock Holmes she is always the woman. I have seldom heard himmention her under any other name. In his eyes she eclipses andpredominates the whole of her sex. It was not that he felt anyemotion akin to love for Irene Adler. All emotions, and that oneparticularly, were abhorrent to his cold, precise but admirablybalanced mind. He was, I take it, the most perfect reasoning andobserving machine that the world has seen, but as a lover he wouldhave placed himself in a false position. He never spoke of the softerpassions, save with a gibe and a sneer. They were admirable thingsfor the observer--excellent for drawing the veil from men's motivesand actions. But for the trained reasoner to admit such intrusionsinto his own delicate and finely adjusted temperament was tointroduce a distracting factor which might throw a doubt upon all hismental results. Grit in a sensitive instrument, or a crack in one ofhis own high-power lenses, would not be more disturbing than a strongemotion in a nature such as his. And yet there was but one woman tohim, and that woman was the late Irene Adler, of dubious andquestionable memory.
I had seen little of Holmes lately. My marriage had drifted us awayfrom each other. My own complete happiness, and the home-centredinterests which rise up around the man who first finds himself masterof his own establishment, were sufficient to absorb all my attention,while Holmes, who loathed every form of society with his wholeBohemian soul, remained in our lodgings in Baker Street, buried amonghis old books, and alternating from week to week between cocaine andambition, the drowsiness of the drug, and the fierce energy of hisown keen nature. He was still, as ever, deeply attracted by the studyof crime, and occupied his immense faculties and extraordinary powersof observation in following out those clues, and clearing up thosemysteries which had been abandoned as hopeless by the officialpolice. From time to time I heard some vague account of his doings:of his summons to Odessa in the case of the Trepoff murder, of hisclearing up of the singular tragedy of the Atkinson brothers atTrincomalee, and finally of the mission which he had accomplished sodelicately and successfully for the reigning family of Holland.Beyond these signs of his activity, however, which I merely sharedwith all the readers of the daily press, I knew little of my formerfriend and companion.
One night--it was on the twentieth of March, 1888--I was returningfrom a journey to a patient (for I had now returned to civilpractice), when my way led me through Baker Street. As I passed thewell-remembered door, which must always be associated in my mind withmy wooing, and with the dark incidents of the Study in Scarlet, I wasseized with a keen desire to see Holmes again, and to know how he wasemploying his extraordinary powers. His rooms were brilliantly lit,and, even as I looked up, I saw his tall, spare figure pass twice ina dark silhouette against the blind. He was pacing the room swiftly,eagerly, with his head sunk upon his chest and his hands claspedbehind him. To me, who knew his every mood and habit, his attitudeand manner told their own story. He was at work again. He had risenout of his drug-created dreams and was hot upon the scent of some newproblem. I rang the bell and was shown up to the chamber which hadformerly been in part my own.
His manner was not effusive. It seldom was; but he was glad, I think,to see me. With hardly a word spoken, but with a kindly eye, he wavedme to an armchair, threw across his case of cigars, and indicated aspirit case and a gasogene in the corner. Then he stood before thefire and looked me over in his singular introspective fashion.
"Wedlock suits you," he remarked. "I think, Watson, that you have puton seven and a half pounds since I saw you."
"Seven!" I answered.
"Indeed, I should have thought a little more. Just a trifle more, Ifancy, Watson. And in practice again, I observe. You did not tell methat you intended to go into harness."
"Then, how do you know?"
"I see it, I deduce it. How do I know that you have been gettingyourself very wet lately, and that you have a most clumsy andcareless servant girl?"
"My dear Holmes," said I, "this is too much. You would certainly havebeen burned, had you lived a few centuries ago. It is true that I hada country walk on Thursday and came home in a dreadful mess, but as Ihave changed my clothes I can't imagine how you deduce it. As to MaryJane, she is incorrigible, and my wife has given her notice, butthere, again, I fail to see how you work it out."
He chuckled to himself and rubbed his long, nervous hands together.
"It is simplicity itself," said he; "my eyes tell me that on theinside of your left shoe, just where the firelight strikes it, theleather is scored by six almost parallel cuts. Obviously they havebeen caused by someone who has very carelessly scraped round theedges of the sole in order to remove crusted mud from it. Hence, yousee, my double deduction that you had been out in vile weather, andthat you had a particularly malignant boot-slitting specimen of theLondon slavey. As to your practice, if a gentleman walks into myrooms smelling of iodoform, with a black mark of nitrate of silverupon his right forefinger, and a bulge on the right side of histop-hat to show where he has secreted his stethoscope, I must bedull, indeed, if I do not pronounce him to be an active member of themedical profession."
I could not help laughing at the ease with which he explained hisprocess of deduction. "When I hear you give your reasons," Iremarked, "the thing always appears to me to be so ridiculouslysimple that I could easily do it myself, though at each successiveinstance of your reasoning I am baffled until you explain yourprocess. And yet I believe that my eyes are as good as yours."
"Quite so," he answered, lighting a cigarette, and throwing himselfdown into an armchair. "You see, but you do not observe. Thedistinction is clear. For example, you have frequently seen the stepswhich lead up from the hall to this room."
"Frequently."
"How often?"
"Well, some hundreds of times."
"Then how many are there?"
"How many? I don't know."
"Quite so! You have not observed. And yet you have seen. That is justmy point. Now, I know that there are seventeen steps, because I haveboth seen and observed. By-the-way, since you are interested in theselittle problems, and since you are good enough to chronicle one ortwo of my trifling experiences, you may be interested in this." Hethrew over a sheet of thick, pink-tinted note-paper which had beenlying open upon the table. "It came by the last post," said he. "Readit aloud."
The note was undated, and without either signature or address.
"There will call upon you to-night, at a quarter to eight o'clock,"it said, "a gentleman who desires to consult you upon a matter of thevery deepest moment. Your recent services to one of the royal housesof Europe have shown that you are one who may safely be trusted withmatters which are of an importance which can hardly be exaggerated.This account of you we have from all quarters received. Be in yourchamber then at that hour, and do not take it amiss if your visitorwear a mask."
"This is indeed a mystery," I remarked. "What do you imagine that itmeans?"
"I have no data yet. It is a capital mistake to theorize before onehas data. Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit theories,instead of theories to suit facts. But the note itself. What do youdeduce from it?"
I carefully examined the writing, and the paper upon which it waswritten.
"The man who wrote it was presumably well to do," I remarked,endeavouring to imitate my companion's processes. "Such paper couldnot be bought under half a crown a packet. It is peculiarly strongand stiff."
"Peculiar--that is the very word," said Holmes. "It is not an Englishpaper at all. Hold it up to the light."
I did so, and saw a large "E" with a small "g," a "P," and a large"G" with a small "t" woven into the texture of the paper.
"What do you make of that?" asked Holmes.
"The name of the maker, no doubt; or his monogram, rather."
"Not at all. The 'G' with the small 't' stands for 'Gesellschaft,'which is the German for 'Company.' It is a customary contraction likeour 'Co.' 'P,' of course, stands for 'Papier.' Now for the 'Eg.' Letus glance at our Continental Gazetteer." He took down a heavy brownvolume from his shelves. "Eglow, Eglonitz--here we are, Egria. It isin a German-speaking country--in Bohemia, not far from Carlsbad.'Remarkable as being the scene of the death of Wallenstein, and forits numerous glass-factories and paper-mills.' Ha, ha, my boy, whatdo you make of that?" His eyes sparkled, and he sent up a great bluetriumphant cloud from his cigarette.
"The paper was made in Bohemia," I said.
"Precisely. And the man who wrote the note is a German. Do you notethe peculiar construction of the sentence--'This account of you wehave from all quarters received.' A Frenchman or Russian could nothave written that. It is the German who is so uncourteous to hisverbs. It only remains, therefore, to discover what is wanted by thisGerman who writes upon Bohemian paper and prefers wearing a mask toshowing his face. And here he comes, if I am not mistaken, to resolveall our doubts."
As he spoke there was the sharp sound of horses' hoofs and gratingwheels against the curb, followed by a sharp pull at the bell. Holmeswhistled.
"A pair, by the sound," said he. "Yes," he continued, glancing out ofthe window. "A nice little brougham and a pair of beauties. A hundredand fifty guineas apiece. There's money in this case, Watson, ifthere is nothing else."
"I think that I had better go, Holmes."
"Not a bit, Doctor. Stay where you are. I am lost without my Boswell.And this promises to be interesting. It would be a pity to miss it."
"But your client--"
"Never mind him. I may want your help, and so may he. Here he comes.Sit down in that armchair, Doctor, and give us your best attention."
A slow and heavy step, which had been heard upon the stairs and inthe passage, paused immediately outside the door. Then there was aloud and authoritative tap.
"Come in!" said Holmes.
A man entered who could hardly have been less than six feet sixinches in height, with the chest and limbs of a Hercules. His dresswas rich with a richness which would, in England, be looked upon asakin to bad taste. Heavy bands of astrakhan were slashed across thesleeves and fronts of his double-breasted coat, while the deep bluecloak which was thrown over his shoulders was lined withflame-coloured silk and secured at the neck with a brooch whichconsisted of a single flaming beryl. Boots which extended halfway uphis calves, and which were trimmed at the tops with rich brown fur,completed the impression of barbaric opulence which was suggested byhis whole appearance. He carried a broad-brimmed hat in his hand,while he wore across the upper part of his face, extending down pastthe cheekbones, a black vizard mask, which he had apparently adjustedthat very moment, for his hand was still raised to it as he entered.From the lower part of the face he appeared to be a man of strongcharacter, with a thick, hanging lip, and a long, straight chinsuggestive of resolution pushed to the length of obstinacy.
"You had my note?" he asked with a deep harsh voice and a stronglymarked German accent. "I told you that I would call." He looked fromone to the other of us, as if uncertain which to address.
"Pray take a seat," said Holmes. "This is my friend and colleague,Dr. Watson, who is occasionally good enough to help me in my cases.Whom have I the honour to address?"
"You may address me as the Count Von Kramm, a Bohemian nobleman. Iunderstand that this gentleman, your friend, is a man of honour anddiscretion, whom I may trust with a matter of the most extremeimportance. If not, I should much prefer to communicate with youalone."
I rose to go, but Holmes caught me by the wrist and pushed me backinto my chair. "It is both, or none," said he. "You may say beforethis gentleman anything which you may say to me."
The Count shrugged his broad shoulders. "Then I must begin," said he,"by binding you both to absolute secrecy for two years; at the end ofthat time the matter will be of no importance. At present it is nottoo much to say that it is of such weight it may have an influenceupon European history."
"I promise," said Holmes.
"And I."
"You will excuse this mask," continued our strange visitor. "Theaugust person who employs me wishes his agent to be unknown to you,and I may confess at once that the title by which I have just calledmyself is not exactly my own."
"I was aware of it," said Holmes dryly.
"The circumstances are of great delicacy, and every precaution has tobe taken to quench what might grow to be an immense scandal andseriously compromise one of the reigning families of Europe. To speakplainly, the matter implicates the great House of Ormstein,hereditary kings of Bohemia."
"I was also aware of that," murmured Holmes, settling himself down inhis armchair and closing his eyes.
Our visitor glanced with some apparent surprise at the languid,lounging figure of the man who had been no doubt depicted to him asthe most incisive reasoner and most energetic agent in Europe. Holmesslowly reopened his eyes and looked impatiently at his giganticclient.
"If your Majesty would condescend to state your case," he remarked,"I should be better able to advise you."
The man sprang from his chair and paced up and down the room inuncontrollable agitation. Then, with a gesture of desperation, hetore the mask from his face and hurled it upon the ground. "You areright," he cried; "I am the King. Why should I attempt to concealit?"
"Why, indeed?" murmured Holmes. "Your Majesty had not spoken before Iwas aware that I was addressing Wilhelm Gottsreich Sigismond vonOrmstein, Grand Duke of Cassel-Felstein, and hereditary King ofBohemia."
"But you can understand," said our strange visitor, sitting down oncemore and passing his hand over his high white forehead, "you canunderstand that I am not accustomed to doing such business in my ownperson. Yet the matter was so delicate that I could not confide it toan agent without putting myself in his power. I have come incognitofrom Prague for the purpose of consulting you."
"Then, pray consult," said Holmes, shutting his eyes once more.
"The facts are briefly these: Some five years ago, during a lengthyvisit to Warsaw, I made the acquaintance of the well-knownadventuress, Irene Adler. The name is no doubt familiar to you."
"Kindly look her up in my index, Doctor," murmured Holmes withoutopening his eyes. For many years he had adopted a system of docketingall paragraphs concerning men and things, so that it was difficult toname a subject or a person on which he could not at once furnishinformation. In this case I found her biography sandwiched in betweenthat of a Hebrew rabbi and that of a staff-commander who had writtena monograph upon the deep-sea fishes.
"Let me see!" said Holmes. "Hum! Born in New Jersey in the year 1858.Contralto--hum! La Scala, hum! Prima donna Imperial Opera ofWarsaw--yes! Retired from operatic stage--ha! Living in London--quiteso! Your Majesty, as I understand, became entangled with this youngperson, wrote her some compromising letters, and is now desirous ofgetting those letters back."
"Precisely so. But how--"
"Was there a secret marriage?"
"None."
"No legal papers or certificates?"
"None."
"Then I fail to follow your Majesty. If this young person shouldproduce her letters for blackmailing or other purposes, how is she toprove their authenticity?"
"There is the writing."
"Pooh, pooh! Forgery."
"My private note-paper."
"Stolen."
"My own seal."
"Imitated."
"My photograph."
"Bought."
"We were both in the photograph."
"Oh, dear! That is very bad! Your Majesty has indeed committed anindiscretion."
"I was mad--insane."
"You have compromised yourself seriously."
"I was only Crown Prince then. I was young. I am but thirty now."
"It must be recovered."
"We have tried and failed."
"Your Majesty must pay. It must be bought."
"She will not sell."
"Stolen, then."
"Five attempts have been made. Twice burglars in my pay ransacked herhouse. Once we diverted her luggage when she travelled. Twice she hasbeen waylaid. There has been no result."
"No sign of it?"
"Absolutely none."
Holmes laughed. "It is quite a pretty little problem," said he.
"But a very serious one to me," returned the King reproachfully.
"Very, indeed. And what does she propose to do with the photograph?"
"To ruin me."
"But how?"
"I am about to be married."
"So I have heard."
"To Clotilde Lothman von Saxe-Meningen, second daughter of the Kingof Scandinavia. You may know the strict principles of her family. Sheis herself the very soul of delicacy. A shadow of a doubt as to myconduct would bring the matter to an end."
"And Irene Adler?"
"Threatens to send them the photograph. And she will do it. I knowthat she will do it. You do not know her, but she has a soul ofsteel. She has the face of the most beautiful of women, and the mindof the most resolute of men. Rather than I should marry anotherwoman, there are no lengths to which she would not go--none."
"You are sure that she has not sent it yet?"
"I am sure."
"And why?"
"Because she has said that she would send it on the day when thebetrothal was publicly proclaimed. That will be next Monday."
"Oh, then we have three days yet," said Holmes with a yawn. "That isvery fortunate, as I have one or two matters of importance to lookinto just at present. Your Majesty will, of course, stay in Londonfor the present?"
"Certainly. You will find me at the Langham under the name of theCount Von Kramm."
"Then I shall drop you a line to let you know how we progress."
"Pray do so. I shall be all anxiety."
"Then, as to money?"
"You have carte blanche."
"Absolutely?"
"I tell you that I would give one of the provinces of my kingdom tohave that photograph."
"And for present expenses?"
The King took a heavy chamois leather bag from under his cloak andlaid it on the table.
"There are three hundred pounds in gold and seven hundred in notes,"he said.
Holmes scribbled a receipt upon a sheet of his note-book and handedit to him.
"And Mademoiselle's address?" he asked.
"Is Briony Lodge, Serpentine Avenue, St. John's Wood."
Holmes took a note of it. "One other question," said he. "Was thephotograph a cabinet?"
"It was."
"Then, good-night, your Majesty, and I trust that we shall soon havesome good news for you. And good-night, Watson," he added, as thewheels of the royal brougham rolled down the street. "If you will begood enough to call to-morrow afternoon at three o'clock I shouldlike to chat this little matter over with you."




     CHAPTER II


At three o'clock precisely I was at Baker Street, but Holmes had notyet returned. The landlady informed me that he had left the houseshortly after eight o'clock in the morning. I sat down beside thefire, however, with the intention of awaiting him, however long hemight be. I was already deeply interested in his inquiry, for, thoughit was surrounded by none of the grim and strange features which wereassociated with the two crimes which I have already recorded, still,the nature of the case and the exalted station of his client gave ita character of its own. Indeed, apart from the nature of theinvestigation which my friend had on hand, there was something in hismasterly grasp of a situation, and his keen, incisive reasoning,which made it a pleasure to me to study his system of work, and tofollow the quick, subtle methods by which he disentangled the mostinextricable mysteries. So accustomed was I to his invariable successthat the very possibility of his failing had ceased to enter into myhead.
It was close upon four before the door opened, and a drunken-lookinggroom, ill-kempt and side-whiskered, with an inflamed face anddisreputable clothes, walked into the room. Accustomed as I was to myfriend's amazing powers in the use of disguises, I had to look threetimes before I was certain that it was indeed he. With a nod hevanished into the bedroom, whence he emerged in five minutestweed-suited and respectable, as of old. Putting his hands into hispockets, he stretched out his legs in front of the fire and laughedheartily for some minutes.
"Well, really!" he cried, and then he choked and laughed again untilhe was obliged to lie back, limp and helpless, in the chair.
"What is it?"
"It's quite too funny. I am sure you could never guess how I employedmy morning, or what I ended by doing."
"I can't imagine. I suppose that you have been watching the habits,and perhaps the house, of Miss Irene Adler."
"Quite so; but the sequel was rather unusual. I will tell you,however. I left the house a little after eight o'clock this morningin the character of a groom out of work. There is a wonderfulsympathy and freemasonry among horsey men. Be one of them, and youwill know all that there is to know. I soon found Briony Lodge. It isa bijou villa, with a garden at the back, but built out in frontright up to the road, two stories. Chubb lock to the door. Largesitting-room on the right side, well furnished, with long windowsalmost to the floor, and those preposterous English window fastenerswhich a child could open. Behind there was nothing remarkable, savethat the passage window could be reached from the top of thecoach-house. I walked round it and examined it closely from everypoint of view, but without noting anything else of interest.
"I then lounged down the street and found, as I expected, that therewas a mews in a lane which runs down by one wall of the garden. Ilent the ostlers a hand in rubbing down their horses, and received inexchange twopence, a glass of half and half, two fills of shagtobacco, and as much information as I could desire about Miss Adler,to say nothing of half a dozen other people in the neighbourhood inwhom I was not in the least interested, but whose biographies I wascompelled to listen to."
"And what of Irene Adler?" I asked.
"Oh, she has turned all the men's heads down in that part. She is thedaintiest thing under a bonnet on this planet. So say theSerpentine-mews, to a man. She lives quietly, sings at concerts,drives out at five every day, and returns at seven sharp for dinner.Seldom goes out at other times, except when she sings. Has only onemale visitor, but a good deal of him. He is dark, handsome, anddashing, never calls less than once a day, and often twice. He is aMr. Godfrey Norton, of the Inner Temple. See the advantages of acabman as a confidant. They had driven him home a dozen times fromSerpentine-mews, and knew all about him. When I had listened to allthey had to tell, I began to walk up and down near Briony Lodge oncemore, and to think over my plan of campaign.
"This Godfrey Norton was evidently an important factor in the matter.He was a lawyer. That sounded ominous. What was the relation betweenthem, and what the object of his repeated visits? Was she his client,his friend, or his mistress? If the former, she had probablytransferred the photograph to his keeping. If the latter, it was lesslikely. On the issue of this question depended whether I shouldcontinue my work at Briony Lodge, or turn my attention to thegentleman's chambers in the Temple. It was a delicate point, and itwidened the field of my inquiry. I fear that I bore you with thesedetails, but I have to let you see my little difficulties, if you areto understand the situation."
"I am following you closely," I answered.
"I was still balancing the matter in my mind when a hansom cab droveup to Briony Lodge, and a gentleman sprang out. He was a remarkablyhandsome man, dark, aquiline, and moustached--evidently the man ofwhom I had heard. He appeared to be in a great hurry, shouted to thecabman to wait, and brushed past the maid who opened the door withthe air of a man who was thoroughly at home.
"He was in the house about half an hour, and I could catch glimpsesof him in the windows of the sitting-room, pacing up and down,talking excitedly, and waving his arms. Of her I could see nothing.Presently he emerged, looking even more flurried than before. As hestepped up to the cab, he pulled a gold watch from his pocket andlooked at it earnestly, 'Drive like the devil,' he shouted, 'first toGross & Hankey's in Regent Street, and then to the Church of St.Monica in the Edgeware Road. Half a guinea if you do it in twentyminutes!'
"Away they went, and I was just wondering whether I should not dowell to follow them when up the lane came a neat little landau, thecoachman with his coat only half-buttoned, and his tie under his ear,while all the tags of his harness were sticking out of the buckles.It hadn't pulled up before she shot out of the hall door and into it.I only caught a glimpse of her at the moment, but she was a lovelywoman, with a face that a man might die for.
"'The Church of St. Monica, John,' she cried, 'and half a sovereignif you reach it in twenty minutes.'
"This was quite too good to lose, Watson. I was just balancingwhether I should run for it, or whether I should perch behind herlandau when a cab came through the street. The driver looked twice atsuch a shabby fare, but I jumped in before he could object. 'TheChurch of St. Monica,' said I, 'and half a sovereign if you reach itin twenty minutes.' It was twenty-five minutes to twelve, and ofcourse it was clear enough what was in the wind.
"My cabby drove fast. I don't think I ever drove faster, but theothers were there before us. The cab and the landau with theirsteaming horses were in front of the door when I arrived. I paid theman and hurried into the church. There was not a soul there save thetwo whom I had followed and a surpliced clergyman, who seemed to beexpostulating with them. They were all three standing in a knot infront of the altar. I lounged up the side aisle like any other idlerwho has dropped into a church. Suddenly, to my surprise, the three atthe altar faced round to me, and Godfrey Norton came running as hardas he could towards me.
"'Thank God,' he cried. 'You'll do. Come! Come!'
"'What then?' I asked.
"'Come, man, come, only three minutes, or it won't be legal.'
"I was half-dragged up to the altar, and before I knew where I was Ifound myself mumbling responses which were whispered in my ear, andvouching for things of which I knew nothing, and generally assistingin the secure tying up of Irene Adler, spinster, to Godfrey Norton,bachelor. It was all done in an instant, and there was the gentlemanthanking me on the one side and the lady on the other, while theclergyman beamed on me in front. It was the most preposterousposition in which I ever found myself in my life, and it was thethought of it that started me laughing just now. It seems that therehad been some informality about their license, that the clergymanabsolutely refused to marry them without a witness of some sort, andthat my lucky appearance saved the bridegroom from having to sallyout into the streets in search of a best man. The bride gave me asovereign, and I mean to wear it on my watch-chain in memory of theoccasion."
"This is a very unexpected turn of affairs," said I; "and what then?"
"Well, I found my plans very seriously menaced. It looked as if thepair might take an immediate departure, and so necessitate veryprompt and energetic measures on my part. At the church door,however, they separated, he driving back to the Temple, and she toher own house. 'I shall drive out in the park at five as usual,' shesaid as she left him. I heard no more. They drove away in differentdirections, and I went off to make my own arrangements."
"Which are?"
"Some cold beef and a glass of beer," he answered, ringing the bell."I have been too busy to think of food, and I am likely to be busierstill this evening. By the way, Doctor, I shall want yourco-operation."
"I shall be delighted."
"You don't mind breaking the law?"
"Not in the least."
"Nor running a chance of arrest?"
"Not in a good cause."
"Oh, the cause is excellent!"
"Then I am your man."
"I was sure that I might rely on you."
"But what is it you wish?"
"When Mrs. Turner has brought in the tray I will make it clear toyou. Now," he said as he turned hungrily on the simple fare that ourlandlady had provided, "I must discuss it while I eat, for I have notmuch time. It is nearly five now. In two hours we must be on thescene of action. Miss Irene, or Madame, rather, returns from herdrive at seven. We must be at Briony Lodge to meet her."
"And what then?"
"You must leave that to me. I have already arranged what is to occur.There is only one point on which I must insist. You must notinterfere, come what may. You understand?"
"I am to be neutral?"
"To do nothing whatever. There will probably be some smallunpleasantness. Do not join in it. It will end in my being conveyedinto the house. Four or five minutes afterwards the sitting-roomwindow will open. You are to station yourself close to that openwindow."
"Yes."
"You are to watch me, for I will be visible to you."
"Yes."
"And when I raise my hand--so--you will throw into the room what Igive you to throw, and will, at the same time, raise the cry of fire.You quite follow me?"
"Entirely."
"It is nothing very formidable," he said, taking a long cigar-shapedroll from his pocket. "It is an ordinary plumber's smoke-rocket,fitted with a cap at either end to make it self-lighting. Your taskis confined to that. When you raise your cry of fire, it will betaken up by quite a number of people. You may then walk to the end ofthe street, and I will rejoin you in ten minutes. I hope that I havemade myself clear?"
"I am to remain neutral, to get near the window, to watch you, and atthe signal to throw in this object, then to raise the cry of fire,and to wait you at the corner of the street."
"Precisely."
"Then you may entirely rely on me."
"That is excellent. I think, perhaps, it is almost time that Iprepare for the new role I have to play."
He disappeared into his bedroom and returned in a few minutes in thecharacter of an amiable and simple-minded Nonconformist clergyman.His broad black hat, his baggy trousers, his white tie, hissympathetic smile, and general look of peering and benevolentcuriosity were such as Mr. John Hare alone could have equalled. Itwas not merely that Holmes changed his costume. His expression, hismanner, his very soul seemed to vary with every fresh part that heassumed. The stage lost a fine actor, even as science lost an acutereasoner, when he became a specialist in crime.
It was a quarter past six when we left Baker Street, and it stillwanted ten minutes to the hour when we found ourselves in SerpentineAvenue. It was already dusk, and the lamps were just being lighted aswe paced up and down in front of Briony Lodge, waiting for the comingof its occupant. The house was just such as I had pictured it fromSherlock Holmes' succinct description, but the locality appeared tobe less private than I expected. On the contrary, for a small streetin a quiet neighbourhood, it was remarkably animated. There was agroup of shabbily dressed men smoking and laughing in a corner, ascissors-grinder with his wheel, two guardsmen who were flirting witha nurse-girl, and several well-dressed young men who were lounging upand down with cigars in their mouths.
"You see," remarked Holmes, as we paced to and fro in front of thehouse, "this marriage rather simplifies matters. The photographbecomes a double-edged weapon now. The chances are that she would beas averse to its being seen by Mr. Godfrey Norton, as our client isto its coming to the eyes of his princess. Now the question is--Whereare we to find the photograph?"
"Where, indeed?"
"It is most unlikely that she carries it about with her. It iscabinet size. Too large for easy concealment about a woman's dress.She knows that the King is capable of having her waylaid andsearched. Two attempts of the sort have already been made. We maytake it, then, that she does not carry it about with her."
"Where, then?"
"Her banker or her lawyer. There is that double possibility. But I aminclined to think neither. Women are naturally secretive, and theylike to do their own secreting. Why should she hand it over to anyoneelse? She could trust her own guardianship, but she could not tellwhat indirect or political influence might be brought to bear upon abusiness man. Besides, remember that she had resolved to use itwithin a few days. It must be where she can lay her hands upon it. Itmust be in her own house."
"But it has twice been burgled."
"Pshaw! They did not know how to look."
"But how will you look?"
"I will not look."
"What then?"
"I will get her to show me."
"But she will refuse."
"She will not be able to. But I hear the rumble of wheels. It is hercarriage. Now carry out my orders to the letter."
As he spoke the gleam of the side-lights of a carriage came round thecurve of the avenue. It was a smart little landau which rattled up tothe door of Briony Lodge. As it pulled up, one of the loafing men atthe corner dashed forward to open the door in the hope of earning acopper, but was elbowed away by another loafer, who had rushed upwith the same intention. A fierce quarrel broke out, which wasincreased by the two guardsmen, who took sides with one of theloungers, and by the scissors-grinder, who was equally hot upon theother side. A blow was struck, and in an instant the lady, who hadstepped from her carriage, was the centre of a little knot of flushedand struggling men, who struck savagely at each other with theirfists and sticks. Holmes dashed into the crowd to protect the lady;but just as he reached her he gave a cry and dropped to the ground,with the blood running freely down his face. At his fall theguardsmen took to their heels in one direction and the loungers inthe other, while a number of better-dressed people, who had watchedthe scuffle without taking part in it, crowded in to help the ladyand to attend to the injured man. Irene Adler, as I will still callher, had hurried up the steps; but she stood at the top with hersuperb figure outlined against the lights of the hall, looking backinto the street.
"Is the poor gentleman much hurt?" she asked.
"He is dead," cried several voices.
"No, no, there's life in him!" shouted another. "But he'll be gonebefore you can get him to hospital."
"He's a brave fellow," said a woman. "They would have had the lady'spurse and watch if it hadn't been for him. They were a gang, and arough one, too. Ah, he's breathing now."
"He can't lie in the street. May we bring him in, marm?"
"Surely. Bring him into the sitting-room. There is a comfortablesofa. This way, please!"
Slowly and solemnly he was borne into Briony Lodge and laid out inthe principal room, while I still observed the proceedings from mypost by the window. The lamps had been lit, but the blinds had notbeen drawn, so that I could see Holmes as he lay upon the couch. I donot know whether he was seized with compunction at that moment forthe part he was playing, but I know that I never felt more heartilyashamed of myself in my life than when I saw the beautiful creatureagainst whom I was conspiring, or the grace and kindliness with whichshe waited upon the injured man. And yet it would be the blackesttreachery to Holmes to draw back now from the part which he hadintrusted to me. I hardened my heart, and took the smoke-rocket fromunder my ulster. After all, I thought, we are not injuring her. Weare but preventing her from injuring another.
Holmes had sat up upon the couch, and I saw him motion like a man whois in need of air. A maid rushed across and threw open the window. Atthe same instant I saw him raise his hand and at the signal I tossedmy rocket into the room with a cry of "Fire!" The word was no soonerout of my mouth than the whole crowd of spectators, well dressed andill--gentlemen, ostlers, and servant-maids--joined in a generalshriek of "Fire!" Thick clouds of smoke curled through the room andout at the open window. I caught a glimpse of rushing figures, and amoment later the voice of Holmes from within assuring them that itwas a false alarm. Slipping through the shouting crowd I made my wayto the corner of the street, and in ten minutes was rejoiced to findmy friend's arm in mine, and to get away from the scene of uproar. Hewalked swiftly and in silence for some few minutes until we hadturned down one of the quiet streets which lead towards the EdgewareRoad.
"You did it very nicely, Doctor," he remarked. "Nothing could havebeen better. It is all right."
"You have the photograph?"
"I know where it is."
"And how did you find out?"
"She showed me, as I told you she would."
"I am still in the dark."
"I do not wish to make a mystery," said he, laughing. "The matter wasperfectly simple. You, of course, saw that everyone in the street wasan accomplice. They were all engaged for the evening."
"I guessed as much."
"Then, when the row broke out, I had a little moist red paint in thepalm of my hand. I rushed forward, fell down, clapped my hand to myface, and became a piteous spectacle. It is an old trick."
"That also I could fathom."
"Then they carried me in. She was bound to have me in. What elsecould she do? And into her sitting-room, which was the very roomwhich I suspected. It lay between that and her bedroom, and I wasdetermined to see which. They laid me on a couch, I motioned for air,they were compelled to open the window, and you had your chance."
"How did that help you?"
"It was all-important. When a woman thinks that her house is on fire,her instinct is at once to rush to the thing which she values most.It is a perfectly overpowering impulse, and I have more than oncetaken advantage of it. In the case of the Darlington substitutionscandal it was of use to me, and also in the Arnsworth Castlebusiness. A married woman grabs at her baby; an unmarried one reachesfor her jewel-box. Now it was clear to me that our lady of to-day hadnothing in the house more precious to her than what we are in questof. She would rush to secure it. The alarm of fire was admirablydone. The smoke and shouting were enough to shake nerves of steel.She responded beautifully. The photograph is in a recess behind asliding panel just above the right bell-pull. She was there in aninstant, and I caught a glimpse of it as she half-drew it out. When Icried out that it was a false alarm, she replaced it, glanced at therocket, rushed from the room, and I have not seen her since. I rose,and, making my excuses, escaped from the house. I hesitated whetherto attempt to secure the photograph at once; but the coachman hadcome in, and as he was watching me narrowly it seemed safer to wait.A little over-precipitance may ruin all."
"And now?" I asked.
"Our quest is practically finished. I shall call with the Kingto-morrow, and with you, if you care to come with us. We will beshown into the sitting-room to wait for the lady, but it is probablethat when she comes she may find neither us nor the photograph. Itmight be a satisfaction to his Majesty to regain it with his ownhands."
"And when will you call?"
"At eight in the morning. She will not be up, so that we shall have aclear field. Besides, we must be prompt, for this marriage may mean acomplete change in her life and habits. I must wire to the Kingwithout delay."
We had reached Baker Street and had stopped at the door. He wassearching his pockets for the key when someone passing said:
"Good-night, Mister Sherlock Holmes."
There were several people on the pavement at the time, but thegreeting appeared to come from a slim youth in an ulster who hadhurried by.
"I've heard that voice before," said Holmes, staring down the dimlylit street. "Now, I wonder who the deuce that could have been."




     CHAPTER III


I slept at Baker Street that night, and we were engaged upon ourtoast and coffee in the morning when the King of Bohemia rushed intothe room.
"You have really got it!" he cried, grasping Sherlock Holmes byeither shoulder and looking eagerly into his face.
"Not yet."
"But you have hopes?"
"I have hopes."
"Then, come. I am all impatience to be gone."
"We must have a cab."
"No, my brougham is waiting."
"Then that will simplify matters." We descended and started off oncemore for Briony Lodge.
"Irene Adler is married," remarked Holmes.
"Married! When?"
"Yesterday."
"But to whom?"
"To an English lawyer named Norton."
"But she could not love him."
"I am in hopes that she does."
"And why in hopes?"
"Because it would spare your Majesty all fear of future annoyance. Ifthe lady loves her husband, she does not love your Majesty. If shedoes not love your Majesty, there is no reason why she shouldinterfere with your Majesty's plan."
"It is true. And yet--Well! I wish she had been of my own station!What a queen she would have made!" He relapsed into a moody silence,which was not broken until we drew up in Serpentine Avenue.
The door of Briony Lodge was open, and an elderly woman stood uponthe steps. She watched us with a sardonic eye as we stepped from thebrougham.
"Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I believe?" said she.
"I am Mr. Holmes," answered my companion, looking at her with aquestioning and rather startled gaze.
"Indeed! My mistress told me that you were likely to call. She leftthis morning with her husband by the 5.15 train from Charing Crossfor the Continent."
"What!" Sherlock Holmes staggered back, white with chagrin andsurprise. "Do you mean that she has left England?"
"Never to return."
"And the papers?" asked the King hoarsely. "All is lost."
"We shall see." He pushed past the servant and rushed into thedrawing-room, followed by the King and myself. The furniture wasscattered about in every direction, with dismantled shelves and opendrawers, as if the lady had hurriedly ransacked them before herflight. Holmes rushed at the bell-pull, tore back a small slidingshutter, and, plunging in his hand, pulled out a photograph and aletter. The photograph was of Irene Adler herself in evening dress,the letter was superscribed to "Sherlock Holmes, Esq. To be left tillcalled for." My friend tore it open and we all three read ittogether. It was dated at midnight of the preceding night and ran inthis way:
"My dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes:"You really did it very well. You took me in completely. Until afterthe alarm of fire, I had not a suspicion. But then, when I found howI had betrayed myself, I began to think. I had been warned againstyou months ago. I had been told that if the King employed an agent itwould certainly be you. And your address had been given me. Yet, withall this, you made me reveal what you wanted to know. Even after Ibecame suspicious, I found it hard to think evil of such a dear, kindold clergyman. But, you know, I have been trained as an actressmyself. Male costume is nothing new to me. I often take advantage ofthe freedom which it gives. I sent John, the coachman, to watch you,ran up stairs, got into my walking-clothes, as I call them, and camedown just as you departed."Well, I followed you to your door, and so made sure that I wasreally an object of interest to the celebrated Mr. Sherlock Holmes.Then I, rather imprudently, wished you good-night, and started forthe Temple to see my husband."We both thought the best resource was flight, when pursued by soformidable an antagonist; so you will find the nest empty when youcall to-morrow. As to the photograph, your client may rest in peace.I love and am loved by a better man than he. The King may do what hewill without hindrance from one whom he has cruelly wronged. I keepit only to safeguard myself, and to preserve a weapon which willalways secure me from any steps which he might take in the future. Ileave a photograph which he might care to possess; and I remain, dearMr. Sherlock Holmes,"Very truly yours,"Irene Norton, ne Adler."
"What a woman--oh, what a woman!" cried the King of Bohemia, when wehad all three read this epistle. "Did I not tell you how quick andresolute she was? Would she not have made an admirable queen? Is itnot a pity that she was not on my level?" 
"From what I have seen of the lady she seems indeed to be on a verydifferent level to your Majesty," said Holmes coldly. "I am sorrythat I have not been able to bring your Majesty's business to a moresuccessful conclusion."
"On the contrary, my dear sir," cried the King; "nothing could bemore successful. I know that her word is inviolate. The photograph isnow as safe as if it were in the fire."
"I am glad to hear your Majesty say so."
"I am immensely indebted to you. Pray tell me in what way I canreward you. This ring--" He slipped an emerald snake ring from hisfinger and held it out upon the palm of his hand.
"Your Majesty has something which I should value even more highly,"said Holmes.
"You have but to name it."
"This photograph!"
The King stared at him in amazement.
"Irene's photograph!" he cried. "Certainly, if you wish it."
"I thank your Majesty. Then there is no more to be done in thematter. I have the honour to wish you a very good-morning." He bowed,and, turning away without observing the hand which the King hadstretched out to him, he set off in my company for his chambers.
And that was how a great scandal threatened to affect the kingdom ofBohemia, and how the best plans of Mr. Sherlock Holmes were beaten bya woman's wit. He used to make merry over the cleverness of women,but I have not heard him do it of late. And when he speaks of IreneAdler, or when he refers to her photograph, it is always under thehonourable title of the woman.





                         THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE
I had called upon my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, one day in theautumn of last year and found him in deep conversation with a verystout, florid-faced, elderly gentleman with fiery red hair. With anapology for my intrusion, I was about to withdraw when Holmes pulledme abruptly into the room and closed the door behind me.
"You could not possibly have come at a better time, my dear Watson,"he said cordially.
"I was afraid that you were engaged."
"So I am. Very much so."
"Then I can wait in the next room."
"Not at all. This gentleman, Mr. Wilson, has been my partner andhelper in many of my most successful cases, and I have no doubt thathe will be of the utmost use to me in yours also."
The stout gentleman half rose from his chair and gave a bob ofgreeting, with a quick little questioning glance from his smallfat-encircled eyes.
"Try the settee," said Holmes, relapsing into his armchair andputting his fingertips together, as was his custom when in judicialmoods. "I know, my dear Watson, that you share my love of all that isbizarre and outside the conventions and humdrum routine of everydaylife. You have shown your relish for it by the enthusiasm which hasprompted you to chronicle, and, if you will excuse my saying so,somewhat to embellish so many of my own little adventures."
"Your cases have indeed been of the greatest interest to me," Iobserved.
"You will remember that I remarked the other day, just before we wentinto the very simple problem presented by Miss Mary Sutherland, thatfor strange effects and extraordinary combinations we must go to lifeitself, which is always far more daring than any effort of theimagination."
"A proposition which I took the liberty of doubting."
"You did, Doctor, but none the less you must come round to my view,for otherwise I shall keep on piling fact upon fact on you until yourreason breaks down under them and acknowledges me to be right. Now,Mr. Jabez Wilson here has been good enough to call upon me thismorning, and to begin a narrative which promises to be one of themost singular which I have listened to for some time. You have heardme remark that the strangest and most unique things are very oftenconnected not with the larger but with the smaller crimes, andoccasionally, indeed, where there is room for doubt whether anypositive crime has been committed. As far as I have heard it isimpossible for me to say whether the present case is an instance ofcrime or not, but the course of events is certainly among the mostsingular that I have ever listened to. Perhaps, Mr. Wilson, you wouldhave the great kindness to recommence your narrative. I ask you notmerely because my friend Dr. Watson has not heard the opening partbut also because the peculiar nature of the story makes me anxious tohave every possible detail from your lips. As a rule, when I haveheard some slight indication of the course of events, I am able toguide myself by the thousands of other similar cases which occur tomy memory. In the present instance I am forced to admit that thefacts are, to the best of my belief, unique."
The portly client puffed out his chest with an appearance of somelittle pride and pulled a dirty and wrinkled newspaper from theinside pocket of his greatcoat. As he glanced down the advertisementcolumn, with his head thrust forward and the paper flattened out uponhis knee, I took a good look at the man and endeavoured, after thefashion of my companion, to read the indications which might bepresented by his dress or appearance.
I did not gain very much, however, by my inspection. Our visitor boreevery mark of being an average commonplace British tradesman, obese,pompous, and slow. He wore rather baggy grey shepherd's checktrousers, a not over-clean black frock-coat, unbuttoned in the front,and a drab waistcoat with a heavy brassy Albert chain, and a squarepierced bit of metal dangling down as an ornament. A frayed top-hatand a faded brown overcoat with a wrinkled velvet collar lay upon achair beside him. Altogether, look as I would, there was nothingremarkable about the man save his blazing red head, and theexpression of extreme chagrin and discontent upon his features.
Sherlock Holmes' quick eye took in my occupation, and he shook hishead with a smile as he noticed my questioning glances. "Beyond theobvious facts that he has at some time done manual labour, that hetakes snuff, that he is a Freemason, that he has been in China, andthat he has done a considerable amount of writing lately, I candeduce nothing else."
Mr. Jabez Wilson started up in his chair, with his forefinger uponthe paper, but his eyes upon my companion.
"How, in the name of good-fortune, did you know all that, Mr.Holmes?" he asked. "How did you know, for example, that I did manuallabour. It's as true as gospel, for I began as a ship's carpenter."
"Your hands, my dear sir. Your right hand is quite a size larger thanyour left. You have worked with it, and the muscles are moredeveloped."
"Well, the snuff, then, and the Freemasonry?"
"I won't insult your intelligence by telling you how I read that,especially as, rather against the strict rules of your order, you usean arc-and-compass breastpin."
"Ah, of course, I forgot that. But the writing?"
"What else can be indicated by that right cuff so very shiny for fiveinches, and the left one with the smooth patch near the elbow whereyou rest it upon the desk?"
"Well, but China?"
"The fish that you have tattooed immediately above your right wristcould only have been done in China. I have made a small study oftattoo marks and have even contributed to the literature of thesubject. That trick of staining the fishes' scales of a delicate pinkis quite peculiar to China. When, in addition, I see a Chinese coinhanging from your watch-chain, the matter becomes even more simple."
Mr. Jabez Wilson laughed heavily. "Well, I never!" said he. "Ithought at first that you had done something clever, but I see thatthere was nothing in it, after all."
"I begin to think, Watson," said Holmes, "that I make a mistake inexplaining. 'Omne ignotum pro magnifico,' you know, and my poorlittle reputation, such as it is, will suffer shipwreck if I am socandid. Can you not find the advertisement, Mr. Wilson?"
"Yes, I have got it now," he answered with his thick red fingerplanted halfway down the column. "Here it is. This is what began itall. You just read it for yourself, sir."
I took the paper from him and read as follows:
"To the Red-headed League: On account of the bequest of the lateEzekiah Hopkins, of Lebanon, Pennsylvania, U. S. A., there is nowanother vacancy open which entitles a member of the League to asalary of 4 a week for purely nominal services. All red-headed menwho are sound in body and mind and above the age of twenty-one years,are eligible. Apply in person on Monday, at eleven o'clock, to DuncanRoss, at the offices of the League, 7 Pope's Court, Fleet Street."
"What on earth does this mean?" I ejaculated after I had twice readover the extraordinary announcement.
Holmes chuckled and wriggled in his chair, as was his habit when inhigh spirits. "It is a little off the beaten track, isn't it?" saidhe. "And now, Mr. Wilson, off you go at scratch and tell us all aboutyourself, your household, and the effect which this advertisement hadupon your fortunes. You will first make a note, Doctor, of the paperand the date."
"It is The Morning Chronicle of April 27, 1890. Just two months ago."
"Very good. Now, Mr. Wilson?"
"Well, it is just as I have been telling you, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,"said Jabez Wilson, mopping his forehead; "I have a small pawnbroker'sbusiness at Coburg Square, near the City. It's not a very largeaffair, and of late years it has not done more than just give me aliving. I used to be able to keep two assistants, but now I only keepone; and I would have a job to pay him but that he is willing to comefor half wages so as to learn the business."
"What is the name of this obliging youth?" asked Sherlock Holmes.
"His name is Vincent Spaulding, and he's not such a youth, either.It's hard to say his age. I should not wish a smarter assistant, Mr.Holmes; and I know very well that he could better himself and earntwice what I am able to give him. But, after all, if he is satisfied,why should I put ideas in his head?"
"Why, indeed? You seem most fortunate in having an employee who comesunder the full market price. It is not a common experience amongemployers in this age. I don't know that your assistant is not asremarkable as your advertisement."
"Oh, he has his faults, too," said Mr. Wilson. "Never was such afellow for photography. Snapping away with a camera when he ought tobe improving his mind, and then diving down into the cellar like arabbit into its hole to develop his pictures. That is his main fault,but on the whole he's a good worker. There's no vice in him."
"He is still with you, I presume?"
"Yes, sir. He and a girl of fourteen, who does a bit of simplecooking and keeps the place clean--that's all I have in the house,for I am a widower and never had any family. We live very quietly,sir, the three of us; and we keep a roof over our heads and pay ourdebts, if we do nothing more.
"The first thing that put us out was that advertisement. Spaulding,he came down into the office just this day eight weeks, with thisvery paper in his hand, and he says:
"'I wish to the Lord, Mr. Wilson, that I was a red-headed man.'
"'Why that?' I asks.
"'Why,' says he, 'here's another vacancy on the League of theRed-headed Men. It's worth quite a little fortune to any man who getsit, and I understand that there are more vacancies than there aremen, so that the trustees are at their wits' end what to do with themoney. If my hair would only change colour, here's a nice little criball ready for me to step into.'
"'Why, what is it, then?' I asked. You see, Mr. Holmes, I am a verystay-at-home man, and as my business came to me instead of my havingto go to it, I was often weeks on end without putting my foot overthe door-mat. In that way I didn't know much of what was going onoutside, and I was always glad of a bit of news.
"'Have you never heard of the League of the Red-headed Men?' he askedwith his eyes open.
"'Never.'
"'Why, I wonder at that, for you are eligible yourself for one of thevacancies.'
"'And what are they worth?' I asked.
"'Oh, merely a couple of hundred a year, but the work is slight, andit need not interfere very much with one's other occupations.'
"Well, you can easily think that that made me prick up my ears, forthe business has not been over-good for some years, and an extracouple of hundred would have been very handy.
"'Tell me all about it,' said I.
"'Well,' said he, showing me the advertisement, 'you can see foryourself that the League has a vacancy, and there is the addresswhere you should apply for particulars. As far as I can make out, theLeague was founded by an American millionaire, Ezekiah Hopkins, whowas very peculiar in his ways. He was himself red-headed, and he hada great sympathy for all red-headed men; so when he died it was foundthat he had left his enormous fortune in the hands of trustees, withinstructions to apply the interest to the providing of easy berths tomen whose hair is of that colour. From all I hear it is splendid payand very little to do.'
"'But,' said I, 'there would be millions of red-headed men who wouldapply.'
"'Not so many as you might think,' he answered. 'You see it is reallyconfined to Londoners, and to grown men. This American had startedfrom London when he was young, and he wanted to do the old town agood turn. Then, again, I have heard it is no use your applying ifyour hair is light red, or dark red, or anything but real bright,blazing, fiery red. Now, if you cared to apply, Mr. Wilson, you wouldjust walk in; but perhaps it would hardly be worth your while to putyourself out of the way for the sake of a few hundred pounds.'
"Now, it is a fact, gentlemen, as you may see for yourselves, that myhair is of a very full and rich tint, so that it seemed to me that ifthere was to be any competition in the matter I stood as good achance as any man that I had ever met. Vincent Spaulding seemed toknow so much about it that I thought he might prove useful, so I justordered him to put up the shutters for the day and to come right awaywith me. He was very willing to have a holiday, so we shut thebusiness up and started off for the address that was given us in theadvertisement.
"I never hope to see such a sight as that again, Mr. Holmes. Fromnorth, south, east, and west every man who had a shade of red in hishair had tramped into the city to answer the advertisement. FleetStreet was choked with red-headed folk, and Pope's Court looked likea coster's orange barrow. I should not have thought there were somany in the whole country as were brought together by that singleadvertisement. Every shade of colour they were--straw, lemon, orange,brick, Irish-setter, liver, clay; but, as Spaulding said, there werenot many who had the real vivid flame-coloured tint. When I saw howmany were waiting, I would have given it up in despair; but Spauldingwould not hear of it. How he did it I could not imagine, but hepushed and pulled and butted until he got me through the crowd, andright up to the steps which led to the office. There was a doublestream upon the stair, some going up in hope, and some coming backdejected; but we wedged in as well as we could and soon foundourselves in the office."
"Your experience has been a most entertaining one," remarked Holmesas his client paused and refreshed his memory with a huge pinch ofsnuff. "Pray continue your very interesting statement."
"There was nothing in the office but a couple of wooden chairs and adeal table, behind which sat a small man with a head that was evenredder than mine. He said a few words to each candidate as he cameup, and then he always managed to find some fault in them which woulddisqualify them. Getting a vacancy did not seem to be such a veryeasy matter, after all. However, when our turn came the little manwas much more favourable to me than to any of the others, and heclosed the door as we entered, so that he might have a private wordwith us.
"'This is Mr. Jabez Wilson,' said my assistant, 'and he is willing tofill a vacancy in the League.'
"'And he is admirably suited for it,' the other answered. 'He hasevery requirement. I cannot recall when I have seen anything sofine.' He took a step backward, cocked his head on one side, andgazed at my hair until I felt quite bashful. Then suddenly he plungedforward, wrung my hand, and congratulated me warmly on my success.
"'It would be injustice to hesitate,' said he. 'You will, however, Iam sure, excuse me for taking an obvious precaution.' With that heseized my hair in both his hands, and tugged until I yelled with thepain. 'There is water in your eyes,' said he as he released me. 'Iperceive that all is as it should be. But we have to be careful, forwe have twice been deceived by wigs and once by paint. I could tellyou tales of cobbler's wax which would disgust you with humannature.' He stepped over to the window and shouted through it at thetop of his voice that the vacancy was filled. A groan ofdisappointment came up from below, and the folk all trooped away indifferent directions until there was not a red-head to be seen exceptmy own and that of the manager.
"'My name,' said he, 'is Mr. Duncan Ross, and I am myself one of thepensioners upon the fund left by our noble benefactor. Are you amarried man, Mr. Wilson? Have you a family?'
"I answered that I had not.
"His face fell immediately.
"'Dear me!' he said gravely, 'that is very serious indeed! I am sorryto hear you say that. The fund was, of course, for the propagationand spread of the red-heads as well as for their maintenance. It isexceedingly unfortunate that you should be a bachelor.'
"My face lengthened at this, Mr. Holmes, for I thought that I was notto have the vacancy after all; but after thinking it over for a fewminutes he said that it would be all right.
"'In the case of another,' said he, 'the objection might be fatal,but we must stretch a point in favour of a man with such a head ofhair as yours. When shall you be able to enter upon your new duties?'
"'Well, it is a little awkward, for I have a business already,' saidI.
"'Oh, never mind about that, Mr. Wilson!' said Vincent Spaulding. 'Ishould be able to look after that for you.'
"'What would be the hours?' I asked.
"'Ten to two.'
"Now a pawnbroker's business is mostly done of an evening, Mr.Holmes, especially Thursday and Friday evening, which is just beforepay-day; so it would suit me very well to earn a little in themornings. Besides, I knew that my assistant was a good man, and thathe would see to anything that turned up.
"'That would suit me very well,' said I. 'And the pay?'
"'Is 4 a week.'
"'And the work?'
"'Is purely nominal.'
"'What do you call purely nominal?'
"'Well, you have to be in the office, or at least in the building,the whole time. If you leave, you forfeit your whole positionforever. The will is very clear upon that point. You don't complywith the conditions if you budge from the office during that time.'
"'It's only four hours a day, and I should not think of leaving,'said I.
"'No excuse will avail,' said Mr. Duncan Ross; 'neither sickness norbusiness nor anything else. There you must stay, or you lose yourbillet.'
"'And the work?'
"'Is to copy out the "Encyclopaedia Britannica." There is the firstvolume of it in that press. You must find your own ink, pens, andblotting-paper, but we provide this table and chair. Will you beready to-morrow?'
"'Certainly,' I answered.
"'Then, good-bye, Mr. Jabez Wilson, and let me congratulate you oncemore on the important position which you have been fortunate enoughto gain.' He bowed me out of the room and I went home with myassistant, hardly knowing what to say or do, I was so pleased at myown good fortune.
"Well, I thought over the matter all day, and by evening I was in lowspirits again; for I had quite persuaded myself that the whole affairmust be some great hoax or fraud, though what its object might be Icould not imagine. It seemed altogether past belief that anyone couldmake such a will, or that they would pay such a sum for doinganything so simple as copying out the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica.'Vincent Spaulding did what he could to cheer me up, but by bedtime Ihad reasoned myself out of the whole thing. However, in the morning Idetermined to have a look at it anyhow, so I bought a penny bottle ofink, and with a quill-pen, and seven sheets of foolscap paper, Istarted off for Pope's Court.
"Well, to my surprise and delight, everything was as right aspossible. The table was set out ready for me, and Mr. Duncan Ross wasthere to see that I got fairly to work. He started me off upon theletter A, and then he left me; but he would drop in from time to timeto see that all was right with me. At two o'clock he bade megood-day, complimented me upon the amount that I had written, andlocked the door of the office after me.
"This went on day after day, Mr. Holmes, and on Saturday the managercame in and planked down four golden sovereigns for my week's work.It was the same next week, and the same the week after. Every morningI was there at ten, and every afternoon I left at two. By degrees Mr.Duncan Ross took to coming in only once of a morning, and then, aftera time, he did not come in at all. Still, of course, I never dared toleave the room for an instant, for I was not sure when he might come,and the billet was such a good one, and suited me so well, that Iwould not risk the loss of it.
"Eight weeks passed away like this, and I had written about Abbotsand Archery and Armour and Architecture and Attica, and hoped withdiligence that I might get on to the B's before very long. It cost mesomething in foolscap, and I had pretty nearly filled a shelf with mywritings. And then suddenly the whole business came to an end."
"To an end?"
"Yes, sir. And no later than this morning. I went to my work as usualat ten o'clock, but the door was shut and locked, with a littlesquare of cardboard hammered on to the middle of the panel with atack. Here it is, and you can read for yourself."
He held up a piece of white cardboard about the size of a sheet ofnote-paper. It read in this fashion:
                         The Red-headed League                                  is                               Dissolved                           October 9, 1890.
Sherlock Holmes and I surveyed this curt announcement and the ruefulface behind it, until the comical side of the affair so completelyovertopped every other consideration that we both burst out into aroar of laughter.
"I cannot see that there is anything very funny," cried our client,flushing up to the roots of his flaming head. "If you can do nothingbetter than laugh at me, I can go elsewhere."
"No, no," cried Holmes, shoving him back into the chair from which hehad half risen. "I really wouldn't miss your case for the world. Itis most refreshingly unusual. But there is, if you will excuse mysaying so, something just a little funny about it. Pray what stepsdid you take when you found the card upon the door?"
"I was staggered, sir. I did not know what to do. Then I called atthe offices round, but none of them seemed to know anything about it.Finally, I went to the landlord, who is an accountant living on theground-floor, and I asked him if he could tell me what had become ofthe Red-headed League. He said that he had never heard of any suchbody. Then I asked him who Mr. Duncan Ross was. He answered that thename was new to him.
"'Well,' said I, 'the gentleman at No. 4.'
"'What, the red-headed man?'
"'Yes.'
"'Oh,' said he, 'his name was William Morris. He was a solicitor andwas using my room as a temporary convenience until his new premiseswere ready. He moved out yesterday.'
"'Where could I find him?'
"'Oh, at his new offices. He did tell me the address. Yes, 17 KingEdward Street, near St. Paul's.'
"I started off, Mr. Holmes, but when I got to that address it was amanufactory of artificial knee-caps, and no one in it had ever heardof either Mr. William Morris or Mr. Duncan Ross."
"And what did you do then?" asked Holmes.
"I went home to Saxe-Coburg Square, and I took the advice of myassistant. But he could not help me in any way. He could only saythat if I waited I should hear by post. But that was not quite goodenough, Mr. Holmes. I did not wish to lose such a place without astruggle, so, as I had heard that you were good enough to give adviceto poor folk who were in need of it, I came right away to you."
"And you did very wisely," said Holmes. "Your case is an exceedinglyremarkable one, and I shall be happy to look into it. From what youhave told me I think that it is possible that graver issues hang fromit than might at first sight appear."
"Grave enough!" said Mr. Jabez Wilson. "Why, I have lost four pound aweek."
"As far as you are personally concerned," remarked Holmes, "I do notsee that you have any grievance against this extraordinary league. Onthe contrary, you are, as I understand, richer by some 30, to saynothing of the minute knowledge which you have gained on everysubject which comes under the letter A. You have lost nothing bythem."
"No, sir. But I want to find out about them, and who they are, andwhat their object was in playing this prank--if it was a prank--uponme. It was a pretty expensive joke for them, for it cost them two andthirty pounds."
"We shall endeavour to clear up these points for you. And, first, oneor two questions, Mr. Wilson. This assistant of yours who firstcalled your attention to the advertisement--how long had he been withyou?"
"About a month then."
"How did he come?"
"In answer to an advertisement."
"Was he the only applicant?"
"No, I had a dozen."
"Why did you pick him?"
"Because he was handy and would come cheap."
"At half-wages, in fact."
"Yes."
"What is he like, this Vincent Spaulding?"
"Small, stout-built, very quick in his ways, no hair on his face,though he's not short of thirty. Has a white splash of acid upon hisforehead."
Holmes sat up in his chair in considerable excitement. "I thought asmuch," said he. "Have you ever observed that his ears are pierced forearrings?"
"Yes, sir. He told me that a gipsy had done it for him when he was alad."
"Hum!" said Holmes, sinking back in deep thought. "He is still withyou?"
"Oh, yes, sir; I have only just left him."
"And has your business been attended to in your absence?"
"Nothing to complain of, sir. There's never very much to do of amorning."
"That will do, Mr. Wilson. I shall be happy to give you an opinionupon the subject in the course of a day or two. To-day is Saturday,and I hope that by Monday we may come to a conclusion."
"Well, Watson," said Holmes when our visitor had left us, "what doyou make of it all?"
"I make nothing of it," I answered frankly. "It is a most mysteriousbusiness."
"As a rule," said Holmes, "the more bizarre a thing is the lessmysterious it proves to be. It is your commonplace, featurelesscrimes which are really puzzling, just as a commonplace face is themost difficult to identify. But I must be prompt over this matter."
"What are you going to do, then?" I asked.
"To smoke," he answered. "It is quite a three pipe problem, and I begthat you won't speak to me for fifty minutes." He curled himself upin his chair, with his thin knees drawn up to his hawk-like nose, andthere he sat with his eyes closed and his black clay pipe thrustingout like the bill of some strange bird. I had come to the conclusionthat he had dropped asleep, and indeed was nodding myself, when hesuddenly sprang out of his chair with the gesture of a man who hasmade up his mind and put his pipe down upon the mantelpiece.
"Sarasate plays at the St. James's Hall this afternoon," he remarked."What do you think, Watson? Could your patients spare you for a fewhours?"
"I have nothing to do to-day. My practice is never very absorbing."
"Then put on your hat and come. I am going through the City first,and we can have some lunch on the way. I observe that there is a gooddeal of German music on the programme, which is rather more to mytaste than Italian or French. It is introspective, and I want tointrospect. Come along!"
We travelled by the Underground as far as Aldersgate; and a shortwalk took us to Saxe-Coburg Square, the scene of the singular storywhich we had listened to in the morning. It was a poky, little,shabby-genteel place, where four lines of dingy two-storied brickhouses looked out into a small railed-in enclosure, where a lawn ofweedy grass and a few clumps of faded laurel-bushes made a hard fightagainst a smoke-laden and uncongenial atmosphere. Three gilt ballsand a brown board with "Jabez Wilson" in white letters, upon a cornerhouse, announced the place where our red-headed client carried on hisbusiness. Sherlock Holmes stopped in front of it with his head on oneside and looked it all over, with his eyes shining brightly betweenpuckered lids. Then he walked slowly up the street, and then downagain to the corner, still looking keenly at the houses. Finally hereturned to the pawnbroker's, and, having thumped vigorously upon thepavement with his stick two or three times, he went up to the doorand knocked. It was instantly opened by a bright-looking,clean-shaven young fellow, who asked him to step in.
"Thank you," said Holmes, "I only wished to ask you how you would gofrom here to the Strand."
"Third right, fourth left," answered the assistant promptly, closingthe door.
"Smart fellow, that," observed Holmes as we walked away. "He is, inmy judgment, the fourth smartest man in London, and for daring I amnot sure that he has not a claim to be third. I have known somethingof him before."
"Evidently," said I, "Mr. Wilson's assistant counts for a good dealin this mystery of the Red-headed League. I am sure that you inquiredyour way merely in order that you might see him."
"Not him."
"What then?"
"The knees of his trousers."
"And what did you see?"
"What I expected to see."
"Why did you beat the pavement?"
"My dear doctor, this is a time for observation, not for talk. We arespies in an enemy's country. We know something of Saxe-Coburg Square.Let us now explore the parts which lie behind it."
The road in which we found ourselves as we turned round the cornerfrom the retired Saxe-Coburg Square presented as great a contrast toit as the front of a picture does to the back. It was one of the mainarteries which conveyed the traffic of the City to the north andwest. The roadway was blocked with the immense stream of commerceflowing in a double tide inward and outward, while the footpaths wereblack with the hurrying swarm of pedestrians. It was difficult torealise as we looked at the line of fine shops and stately businesspremises that they really abutted on the other side upon the fadedand stagnant square which we had just quitted.
"Let me see," said Holmes, standing at the corner and glancing alongthe line, "I should like just to remember the order of the houseshere. It is a hobby of mine to have an exact knowledge of London.There is Mortimer's, the tobacconist, the little newspaper shop, theCoburg branch of the City and Suburban Bank, the VegetarianRestaurant, and McFarlane's carriage-building depot. That carries usright on to the other block. And now, Doctor, we've done our work, soit's time we had some play. A sandwich and a cup of coffee, and thenoff to violin-land, where all is sweetness and delicacy and harmony,and there are no red-headed clients to vex us with their conundrums."
My friend was an enthusiastic musician, being himself not only a verycapable performer but a composer of no ordinary merit. All theafternoon he sat in the stalls wrapped in the most perfect happiness,gently waving his long, thin fingers in time to the music, while hisgently smiling face and his languid, dreamy eyes were as unlike thoseof Holmes the sleuth-hound, Holmes the relentless, keen-witted,ready-handed criminal agent, as it was possible to conceive. In hissingular character the dual nature alternately asserted itself, andhis extreme exactness and astuteness represented, as I have oftenthought, the reaction against the poetic and contemplative mood whichoccasionally predominated in him. The swing of his nature took himfrom extreme languor to devouring energy; and, as I knew well, he wasnever so truly formidable as when, for days on end, he had beenlounging in his armchair amid his improvisations and his black-lettereditions. Then it was that the lust of the chase would suddenly comeupon him, and that his brilliant reasoning power would rise to thelevel of intuition, until those who were unacquainted with hismethods would look askance at him as on a man whose knowledge was notthat of other mortals. When I saw him that afternoon so enwrapped inthe music at St. James's Hall I felt that an evil time might becoming upon those whom he had set himself to hunt down.
"You want to go home, no doubt, Doctor," he remarked as we emerged.
"Yes, it would be as well."
"And I have some business to do which will take some hours. Thisbusiness at Coburg Square is serious."
"Why serious?"
"A considerable crime is in contemplation. I have every reason tobelieve that we shall be in time to stop it. But to-day beingSaturday rather complicates matters. I shall want your helpto-night."
"At what time?"
"Ten will be early enough."
"I shall be at Baker Street at ten."
"Very well. And, I say, Doctor, there may be some little danger, sokindly put your army revolver in your pocket." He waved his hand,turned on his heel, and disappeared in an instant among the crowd.
I trust that I am not more dense than my neighbours, but I was alwaysoppressed with a sense of my own stupidity in my dealings withSherlock Holmes. Here I had heard what he had heard, I had seen whathe had seen, and yet from his words it was evident that he sawclearly not only what had happened but what was about to happen,while to me the whole business was still confused and grotesque. As Idrove home to my house in Kensington I thought over it all, from theextraordinary story of the red-headed copier of the "Encyclopaedia"down to the visit to Saxe-Coburg Square, and the ominous words withwhich he had parted from me. What was this nocturnal expedition, andwhy should I go armed?  Where were we going, and what were we to do?I had the hint from Holmes that this smooth-faced pawnbroker'sassistant was a formidable man--a man who might play a deep game. Itried to puzzle it out, but gave it up in despair and set the matteraside until night should bring an explanation.
It was a quarter-past nine when I started from home and made my wayacross the Park, and so through Oxford Street to Baker Street. Twohansoms were standing at the door, and as I entered the passage Iheard the sound of voices from above. On entering his room I foundHolmes in animated conversation with two men, one of whom Irecognised as Peter Jones, the official police agent, while the otherwas a long, thin, sad-faced man, with a very shiny hat andoppressively respectable frock-coat.
"Ha! Our party is complete," said Holmes, buttoning up his pea-jacketand taking his heavy hunting crop from the rack. "Watson, I think youknow Mr. Jones, of Scotland Yard? Let me introduce you to Mr.Merryweather, who is to be our companion in to-night's adventure."
"We're hunting in couples again, Doctor, you see," said Jones in hisconsequential way. "Our friend here is a wonderful man for starting achase. All he wants is an old dog to help him to do the runningdown."
"I hope a wild goose may not prove to be the end of our chase,"observed Mr. Merryweather gloomily.
"You may place considerable confidence in Mr. Holmes, sir," said thepolice agent loftily. "He has his own little methods, which are, ifhe won't mind my saying so, just a little too theoretical andfantastic, but he has the makings of a detective in him. It is nottoo much to say that once or twice, as in that business of the Sholtomurder and the Agra treasure, he has been more nearly correct thanthe official force."
"Oh, if you say so, Mr. Jones, it is all right," said the strangerwith deference. "Still, I confess that I miss my rubber. It is thefirst Saturday night for seven-and-twenty years that I have not hadmy rubber."
"I think you will find," said Sherlock Holmes, "that you will playfor a higher stake to-night than you have ever done yet, and that theplay will be more exciting. For you, Mr. Merryweather, the stake willbe some 30,000; and for you, Jones, it will be the man upon whom youwish to lay your hands."
"John Clay, the murderer, thief, smasher, and forger. He's a youngman, Mr. Merryweather, but he is at the head of his profession, and Iwould rather have my bracelets on him than on any criminal in London.He's a remarkable man, is young John Clay. His grandfather was aroyal duke, and he himself has been to Eton and Oxford. His brain isas cunning as his fingers, and though we meet signs of him at everyturn, we never know where to find the man himself. He'll crack a cribin Scotland one week, and be raising money to build an orphanage inCornwall the next. I've been on his track for years and have neverset eyes on him yet."
"I hope that I may have the pleasure of introducing you to-night.I've had one or two little turns also with Mr. John Clay, and I agreewith you that he is at the head of his profession. It is past ten,however, and quite time that we started. If you two will take thefirst hansom, Watson and I will follow in the second."
Sherlock Holmes was not very communicative during the long drive andlay back in the cab humming the tunes which he had heard in theafternoon. We rattled through an endless labyrinth of gas-lit streetsuntil we emerged into Farrington Street.
"We are close there now," my friend remarked. "This fellowMerryweather is a bank director, and personally interested in thematter. I thought it as well to have Jones with us also. He is not abad fellow, though an absolute imbecile in his profession. He has onepositive virtue. He is as brave as a bulldog and as tenacious as alobster if he gets his claws upon anyone. Here we are, and they arewaiting for us."
We had reached the same crowded thoroughfare in which we had foundourselves in the morning. Our cabs were dismissed, and, following theguidance of Mr. Merryweather, we passed down a narrow passage andthrough a side door, which he opened for us. Within there was a smallcorridor, which ended in a very massive iron gate. This also wasopened, and led down a flight of winding stone steps, whichterminated at another formidable gate. Mr. Merryweather stopped tolight a lantern, and then conducted us down a dark, earth-smellingpassage, and so, after opening a third door, into a huge vault orcellar, which was piled all round with crates and massive boxes.
"You are not very vulnerable from above," Holmes remarked as he heldup the lantern and gazed about him.
"Nor from below," said Mr. Merryweather, striking his stick upon theflags which lined the floor. "Why, dear me, it sounds quite hollow!"he remarked, looking up in surprise.
"I must really ask you to be a little more quiet!" said Holmesseverely. "You have already imperilled the whole success of ourexpedition. Might I beg that you would have the goodness to sit downupon one of those boxes, and not to interfere?"
The solemn Mr. Merryweather perched himself upon a crate, with a veryinjured expression upon his face, while Holmes fell upon his kneesupon the floor and, with the lantern and a magnifying lens, began toexamine minutely the cracks between the stones. A few secondssufficed to satisfy him, for he sprang to his feet again and put hisglass in his pocket.
"We have at least an hour before us," he remarked, "for they canhardly take any steps until the good pawnbroker is safely in bed.Then they will not lose a minute, for the sooner they do their workthe longer time they will have for their escape. We are at present,Doctor--as no doubt you have divined--in the cellar of the Citybranch of one of the principal London banks. Mr. Merryweather is thechairman of directors, and he will explain to you that there arereasons why the more daring criminals of London should take aconsiderable interest in this cellar at present."
"It is our French gold," whispered the director. "We have had severalwarnings that an attempt might be made upon it."
"Your French gold?"
"Yes. We had occasion some months ago to strengthen our resources andborrowed for that purpose 30,000 napoleons from the Bank of France.It has become known that we have never had occasion to unpack themoney, and that it is still lying in our cellar. The crate upon whichI sit contains 2,000 napoleons packed between layers of lead foil.Our reserve of bullion is much larger at present than is usually keptin a single branch office, and the directors have had misgivings uponthe subject."
"Which were very well justified," observed Holmes. "And now it istime that we arranged our little plans. I expect that within an hourmatters will come to a head. In the meantime Mr. Merryweather, wemust put the screen over that dark lantern."
"And sit in the dark?"
"I am afraid so. I had brought a pack of cards in my pocket, and Ithought that, as we were a partie carre, you might have your rubberafter all. But I see that the enemy's preparations have gone so farthat we cannot risk the presence of a light. And, first of all, wemust choose our positions. These are daring men, and though we shalltake them at a disadvantage, they may do us some harm unless we arecareful. I shall stand behind this crate, and do you concealyourselves behind those. Then, when I flash a light upon them, closein swiftly. If they fire, Watson, have no compunction about shootingthem down."
I placed my revolver, cocked, upon the top of the wooden case behindwhich I crouched. Holmes shot the slide across the front of hislantern and left us in pitch darkness--such an absolute darkness as Ihave never before experienced. The smell of hot metal remained toassure us that the light was still there, ready to flash out at amoment's notice. To me, with my nerves worked up to a pitch ofexpectancy, there was something depressing and subduing in the suddengloom, and in the cold dank air of the vault.
"They have but one retreat," whispered Holmes. "That is back throughthe house into Saxe-Coburg Square. I hope that you have done what Iasked you, Jones?"
"I have an inspector and two officers waiting at the front door."
"Then we have stopped all the holes. And now we must be silent andwait."
What a time it seemed! From comparing notes afterwards it was but anhour and a quarter, yet it appeared to me that the night must havealmost gone and the dawn be breaking above us. My limbs were wearyand stiff, for I feared to change my position; yet my nerves wereworked up to the highest pitch of tension, and my hearing was soacute that I could not only hear the gentle breathing of mycompanions, but I could distinguish the deeper, heavier in-breath ofthe bulky Jones from the thin, sighing note of the bank director.From my position I could look over the case in the direction of thefloor. Suddenly my eyes caught the glint of a light.
At first it was but a lurid spark upon the stone pavement. Then itlengthened out until it became a yellow line, and then, without anywarning or sound, a gash seemed to open and a hand appeared, a white,almost womanly hand, which felt about in the centre of the littlearea of light. For a minute or more the hand, with its writhingfingers, protruded out of the floor. Then it was withdrawn assuddenly as it appeared, and all was dark again save the single luridspark which marked a chink between the stones.
Its disappearance, however, was but momentary. With a rending,tearing sound, one of the broad, white stones turned over upon itsside and left a square, gaping hole, through which streamed the lightof a lantern. Over the edge there peeped a clean-cut, boyish face,which looked keenly about it, and then, with a hand on either side ofthe aperture, drew itself shoulder-high and waist-high, until oneknee rested upon the edge. In another instant he stood at the side ofthe hole and was hauling after him a companion, lithe and small likehimself, with a pale face and a shock of very red hair.
"It's all clear," he whispered. "Have you the chisel and the bags?Great Scott! Jump, Archie, jump, and I'll swing for it!"
Sherlock Holmes had sprung out and seized the intruder by the collar.The other dived down the hole, and I heard the sound of rending clothas Jones clutched at his skirts. The light flashed upon the barrel ofa revolver, but Holmes' hunting crop came down on the man's wrist,and the pistol clinked upon the stone floor.
"It's no use, John Clay," said Holmes blandly. "You have no chance atall."
"So I see," the other answered with the utmost coolness. "I fancythat my pal is all right, though I see you have got his coat-tails."
"There are three men waiting for him at the door," said Holmes.
"Oh, indeed! You seem to have done the thing very completely. I mustcompliment you."
"And I you," Holmes answered. "Your red-headed idea was very new andeffective."
"You'll see your pal again presently," said Jones. "He's quicker atclimbing down holes than I am. Just hold out while I fix thederbies."
"I beg that you will not touch me with your filthy hands," remarkedour prisoner as the handcuffs clattered upon his wrists. "You may notbe aware that I have royal blood in my veins. Have the goodness,also, when you address me always to say 'sir' and 'please.'"
"All right," said Jones with a stare and a snigger. "Well, would youplease, sir, march upstairs, where we can get a cab to carry yourHighness to the police-station?"
"That is better," said John Clay serenely. He made a sweeping bow tothe three of us and walked quietly off in the custody of thedetective.
"Really, Mr. Holmes," said Mr. Merryweather as we followed them fromthe cellar, "I do not know how the bank can thank you or repay you.There is no doubt that you have detected and defeated in the mostcomplete manner one of the most determined attempts at bank robberythat have ever come within my experience."
"I have had one or two little scores of my own to settle with Mr.John Clay," said Holmes. "I have been at some small expense over thismatter, which I shall expect the bank to refund, but beyond that I amamply repaid by having had an experience which is in many waysunique, and by hearing the very remarkable narrative of theRed-headed League."
"You see, Watson," he explained in the early hours of the morning aswe sat over a glass of whisky and soda in Baker Street, "it wasperfectly obvious from the first that the only possible object ofthis rather fantastic business of the advertisement of the League,and the copying of the 'Encyclopaedia,' must be to get this notover-bright pawnbroker out of the way for a number of hours everyday. It was a curious way of managing it, but, really, it would bedifficult to suggest a better. The method was no doubt suggested toClay's ingenious mind by the colour of his accomplice's hair. The 4a week was a lure which must draw him, and what was it to them, whowere playing for thousands? They put in the advertisement, one roguehas the temporary office, the other rogue incites the man to applyfor it, and together they manage to secure his absence every morningin the week. From the time that I heard of the assistant having comefor half wages, it was obvious to me that he had some strong motivefor securing the situation."
"But how could you guess what the motive was?"
"Had there been women in the house, I should have suspected a merevulgar intrigue. That, however, was out of the question. The man'sbusiness was a small one, and there was nothing in his house whichcould account for such elaborate preparations, and such anexpenditure as they were at. It must, then, be something out of thehouse. What could it be? I thought of the assistant's fondness forphotography, and his trick of vanishing into the cellar. The cellar!There was the end of this tangled clue. Then I made inquiries as tothis mysterious assistant and found that I had to deal with one ofthe coolest and most daring criminals in London. He was doingsomething in the cellar--something which took many hours a day formonths on end. What could it be, once more? I could think of nothingsave that he was running a tunnel to some other building.
"So far I had got when we went to visit the scene of action. Isurprised you by beating upon the pavement with my stick. I wasascertaining whether the cellar stretched out in front or behind. Itwas not in front. Then I rang the bell, and, as I hoped, theassistant answered it. We have had some skirmishes, but we had neverset eyes upon each other before. I hardly looked at his face. Hisknees were what I wished to see. You must yourself have remarked howworn, wrinkled, and stained they were. They spoke of those hours ofburrowing. The only remaining point was what they were burrowing for.I walked round the corner, saw the City and Suburban Bank abutted onour friend's premises, and felt that I had solved my problem. Whenyou drove home after the concert I called upon Scotland Yard and uponthe chairman of the bank directors, with the result that you haveseen."
"And how could you tell that they would make their attempt to-night?"I asked.
"Well, when they closed their League offices that was a sign thatthey cared no longer about Mr. Jabez Wilson's presence--in otherwords, that they had completed their tunnel. But it was essentialthat they should use it soon, as it might be discovered, or thebullion might be removed. Saturday would suit them better than anyother day, as it would give them two days for their escape. For allthese reasons I expected them to come to-night."
"You reasoned it out beautifully," I exclaimed in unfeignedadmiration. "It is so long a chain, and yet every link rings true."
"It saved me from ennui," he answered, yawning. "Alas! I already feelit closing in upon me. My life is spent in one long effort to escapefrom the commonplaces of existence. These little problems help me todo so."
"And you are a benefactor of the race," said I.
He shrugged his shoulders. "Well, perhaps, after all, it is of somelittle use," he remarked. "'L'homme c'est rien--l'oeuvre c'est tout,'as Gustave Flaubert wrote to George Sand."





                          A CASE OF IDENTITY
"My dear fellow," said Sherlock Holmes as we sat on either side ofthe fire in his lodgings at Baker Street, "life is infinitelystranger than anything which the mind of man could invent. We wouldnot dare to conceive the things which are really mere commonplaces ofexistence. If we could fly out of that window hand in hand, hoverover this great city, gently remove the roofs, and peep in at thequeer things which are going on, the strange coincidences, theplannings, the cross-purposes, the wonderful chains of events,working through generations, and leading to the most outr results,it would make all fiction with its conventionalities and foreseenconclusions most stale and unprofitable."
"And yet I am not convinced of it," I answered. "The cases which cometo light in the papers are, as a rule, bald enough, and vulgarenough. We have in our police reports realism pushed to its extremelimits, and yet the result is, it must be confessed, neitherfascinating nor artistic."
"A certain selection and discretion must be used in producing arealistic effect," remarked Holmes. "This is wanting in the policereport, where more stress is laid, perhaps, upon the platitudes ofthe magistrate than upon the details, which to an observer containthe vital essence of the whole matter. Depend upon it, there isnothing so unnatural as the commonplace."
I smiled and shook my head. "I can quite understand your thinkingso." I said. "Of course, in your position of unofficial adviser andhelper to everybody who is absolutely puzzled, throughout threecontinents, you are brought in contact with all that is strange andbizarre. But here"--I picked up the morning paper from theground--"let us put it to a practical test. Here is the first headingupon which I come. 'A husband's cruelty to his wife.' There is half acolumn of print, but I know without reading it that it is allperfectly familiar to me. There is, of course, the other woman, thedrink, the push, the blow, the bruise, the sympathetic sister orlandlady. The crudest of writers could invent nothing more crude."
"Indeed, your example is an unfortunate one for your argument," saidHolmes, taking the paper and glancing his eye down it. "This is theDundas separation case, and, as it happens, I was engaged in clearingup some small points in connection with it. The husband was ateetotaler, there was no other woman, and the conduct complained ofwas that he had drifted into the habit of winding up every meal bytaking out his false teeth and hurling them at his wife, which, youwill allow, is not an action likely to occur to the imagination ofthe average story-teller. Take a pinch of snuff, Doctor, andacknowledge that I have scored over you in your example."
He held out his snuffbox of old gold, with a great amethyst in thecentre of the lid. Its splendour was in such contrast to his homelyways and simple life that I could not help commenting upon it.
"Ah," said he, "I forgot that I had not seen you for some weeks. Itis a little souvenir from the King of Bohemia in return for myassistance in the case of the Irene Adler papers."
"And the ring?" I asked, glancing at a remarkable brilliant whichsparkled upon his finger.
"It was from the reigning family of Holland, though the matter inwhich I served them was of such delicacy that I cannot confide iteven to you, who have been good enough to chronicle one or two of mylittle problems."
"And have you any on hand just now?" I asked with interest.
"Some ten or twelve, but none which present any feature of interest.They are important, you understand, without being interesting.Indeed, I have found that it is usually in unimportant matters thatthere is a field for the observation, and for the quick analysis ofcause and effect which gives the charm to an investigation. Thelarger crimes are apt to be the simpler, for the bigger the crime themore obvious, as a rule, is the motive. In these cases, save for onerather intricate matter which has been referred to me fromMarseilles, there is nothing which presents any features of interest.It is possible, however, that I may have something better before verymany minutes are over, for this is one of my clients, or I am muchmistaken."
He had risen from his chair and was standing between the partedblinds gazing down into the dull neutral-tinted London street.Looking over his shoulder, I saw that on the pavement opposite therestood a large woman with a heavy fur boa round her neck, and a largecurling red feather in a broad-brimmed hat which was tilted in acoquettish Duchess of Devonshire fashion over her ear. From underthis great panoply she peeped up in a nervous, hesitating fashion atour windows, while her body oscillated backward and forward, and herfingers fidgeted with her glove buttons. Suddenly, with a plunge, asof the swimmer who leaves the bank, she hurried across the road, andwe heard the sharp clang of the bell.
"I have seen those symptoms before," said Holmes, throwing hiscigarette into the fire. "Oscillation upon the pavement always meansan affaire de coeur. She would like advice, but is not sure that thematter is not too delicate for communication. And yet even here wemay discriminate. When a woman has been seriously wronged by a manshe no longer oscillates, and the usual symptom is a broken bellwire. Here we may take it that there is a love matter, but that themaiden is not so much angry as perplexed, or grieved. But here shecomes in person to resolve our doubts."
As he spoke there was a tap at the door, and the boy in buttonsentered to announce Miss Mary Sutherland, while the lady herselfloomed behind his small black figure like a full-sailed merchant-manbehind a tiny pilot boat. Sherlock Holmes welcomed her with the easycourtesy for which he was remarkable, and, having closed the door andbowed her into an armchair, he looked her over in the minute and yetabstracted fashion which was peculiar to him.
"Do you not find," he said, "that with your short sight it is alittle trying to do so much typewriting?"
"I did at first," she answered, "but now I know where the letters arewithout looking." Then, suddenly realising the full purport of hiswords, she gave a violent start and looked up, with fear andastonishment upon her broad, good-humoured face. "You've heard aboutme, Mr. Holmes," she cried, "else how could you know all that?"
"Never mind," said Holmes, laughing; "it is my business to knowthings. Perhaps I have trained myself to see what others overlook. Ifnot, why should you come to consult me?"
"I came to you, sir, because I heard of you from Mrs. Etherege, whosehusband you found so easy when the police and everyone had given himup for dead. Oh, Mr. Holmes, I wish you would do as much for me. I'mnot rich, but still I have a hundred a year in my own right, besidesthe little that I make by the machine, and I would give it all toknow what has become of Mr. Hosmer Angel."
"Why did you come away to consult me in such a hurry?" asked SherlockHolmes, with his finger-tips together and his eyes to the ceiling.
Again a startled look came over the somewhat vacuous face of MissMary Sutherland. "Yes, I did bang out of the house," she said, "forit made me angry to see the easy way in which Mr. Windibank--that is,my father--took it all. He would not go to the police, and he wouldnot go to you, and so at last, as he would do nothing and kept onsaying that there was no harm done, it made me mad, and I just onwith my things and came right away to you."
"Your father," said Holmes, "your stepfather, surely, since the nameis different."
"Yes, my stepfather. I call him father, though it sounds funny, too,for he is only five years and two months older than myself."
"And your mother is alive?"
"Oh, yes, mother is alive and well. I wasn't best pleased, Mr.Holmes, when she married again so soon after father's death, and aman who was nearly fifteen years younger than herself. Father was aplumber in the Tottenham Court Road, and he left a tidy businessbehind him, which mother carried on with Mr. Hardy, the foreman; butwhen Mr. Windibank came he made her sell the business, for he wasvery superior, being a traveller in wines. They got 4700 for thegoodwill and interest, which wasn't near as much as father could havegot if he had been alive."
I had expected to see Sherlock Holmes impatient under this ramblingand inconsequential narrative, but, on the contrary, he had listenedwith the greatest concentration of attention.
"Your own little income," he asked, "does it come out of thebusiness?"
"Oh, no, sir. It is quite separate and was left me by my uncle Ned inAuckland. It is in New Zealand stock, paying 4 per cent. Twothousand five hundred pounds was the amount, but I can only touch theinterest."
"You interest me extremely," said Holmes. "And since you draw solarge a sum as a hundred a year, with what you earn into the bargain,you no doubt travel a little and indulge yourself in every way. Ibelieve that a single lady can get on very nicely upon an income ofabout 60."
"I could do with much less than that, Mr. Holmes, but you understandthat as long as I live at home I don't wish to be a burden to them,and so they have the use of the money just while I am staying withthem. Of course, that is only just for the time. Mr. Windibank drawsmy interest every quarter and pays it over to mother, and I find thatI can do pretty well with what I earn at typewriting. It brings metwopence a sheet, and I can often do from fifteen to twenty sheets ina day."
"You have made your position very clear to me," said Holmes. "This ismy friend, Dr. Watson, before whom you can speak as freely as beforemyself. Kindly tell us now all about your connection with Mr. HosmerAngel."
A flush stole over Miss Sutherland's face, and she picked nervouslyat the fringe of her jacket. "I met him first at the gasfitters'ball," she said. "They used to send father tickets when he was alive,and then afterwards they remembered us, and sent them to mother. Mr.Windibank did not wish us to go. He never did wish us to go anywhere.He would get quite mad if I wanted so much as to join a Sunday-schooltreat. But this time I was set on going, and I would go; for whatright had he to prevent? He said the folk were not fit for us toknow, when all father's friends were to be there. And he said that Ihad nothing fit to wear, when I had my purple plush that I had neverso much as taken out of the drawer. At last, when nothing else woulddo, he went off to France upon the business of the firm, but we went,mother and I, with Mr. Hardy, who used to be our foreman, and it wasthere I met Mr. Hosmer Angel."
"I suppose," said Holmes, "that when Mr. Windibank came back fromFrance he was very annoyed at your having gone to the ball."
"Oh, well, he was very good about it. He laughed, I remember, andshrugged his shoulders, and said there was no use denying anything toa woman, for she would have her way."
"I see. Then at the gasfitters' ball you met, as I understand, agentleman called Mr. Hosmer Angel."
"Yes, sir. I met him that night, and he called next day to ask if wehad got home all safe, and after that we met him--that is to say, Mr.Holmes, I met him twice for walks, but after that father came backagain, and Mr. Hosmer Angel could not come to the house any more."
"No?"
"Well, you know father didn't like anything of the sort. He wouldn'thave any visitors if he could help it, and he used to say that awoman should be happy in her own family circle. But then, as I usedto say to mother, a woman wants her own circle to begin with, and Ihad not got mine yet."
"But how about Mr. Hosmer Angel? Did he make no attempt to see you?"
"Well, father was going off to France again in a week, and Hosmerwrote and said that it would be safer and better not to see eachother until he had gone. We could write in the meantime, and he usedto write every day. I took the letters in in the morning, so therewas no need for father to know."
"Were you engaged to the gentleman at this time?"
"Oh, yes, Mr. Holmes. We were engaged after the first walk that wetook. Hosmer--Mr. Angel--was a cashier in an office in LeadenhallStreet--and--"
"What office?"
"That's the worst of it, Mr. Holmes, I don't know."
"Where did he live, then?"
"He slept on the premises."
"And you don't know his address?"
"No--except that it was Leadenhall Street."
"Where did you address your letters, then?"
"To the Leadenhall Street Post Office, to be left till called for. Hesaid that if they were sent to the office he would be chaffed by allthe other clerks about having letters from a lady, so I offered totypewrite them, like he did his, but he wouldn't have that, for hesaid that when I wrote them they seemed to come from me, but whenthey were typewritten he always felt that the machine had comebetween us. That will just show you how fond he was of me, Mr.Holmes, and the little things that he would think of."
"It was most suggestive," said Holmes. "It has long been an axiom ofmine that the little things are infinitely the most important.  Canyou remember any other little things about Mr. Hosmer Angel?"
"He was a very shy man, Mr. Holmes. He would rather walk with me inthe evening than in the daylight, for he said that he hated to beconspicuous. Very retiring and gentlemanly he was. Even his voice wasgentle. He'd had the quinsy and swollen glands when he was young, hetold me, and it had left him with a weak throat, and a hesitating,whispering fashion of speech. He was always well dressed, very neatand plain, but his eyes were weak, just as mine are, and he woretinted glasses against the glare."
"Well, and what happened when Mr. Windibank, your stepfather,returned to France?"
"Mr. Hosmer Angel came to the house again and proposed that we shouldmarry before father came back. He was in dreadful earnest and made meswear, with my hands on the Testament, that whatever happened I wouldalways be true to him. Mother said he was quite right to make meswear, and that it was a sign of his passion. Mother was all in hisfavour from the first and was even fonder of him than I was. Then,when they talked of marrying within the week, I began to ask aboutfather; but they both said never to mind about father, but just totell him afterwards, and mother said she would make it all right withhim. I didn't quite like that, Mr. Holmes. It seemed funny that Ishould ask his leave, as he was only a few years older than me; but Ididn't want to do anything on the sly, so I wrote to father atBordeaux, where the company has its French offices, but the lettercame back to me on the very morning of the wedding."
"It missed him, then?"
"Yes, sir; for he had started to England just before it arrived."
"Ha! that was unfortunate. Your wedding was arranged, then, for theFriday. Was it to be in church?"
"Yes, sir, but very quietly. It was to be at St. Saviour's, nearKing's Cross, and we were to have breakfast afterwards at the St.Pancras Hotel. Hosmer came for us in a hansom, but as there were twoof us he put us both into it and stepped himself into a four-wheeler,which happened to be the only other cab in the street. We got to thechurch first, and when the four-wheeler drove up we waited for him tostep out, but he never did, and when the cabman got down from the boxand looked there was no one there! The cabman said that he could notimagine what had become of him, for he had seen him get in with hisown eyes. That was last Friday, Mr. Holmes, and I have never seen orheard anything since then to throw any light upon what became ofhim."
"It seems to me that you have been very shamefully treated," saidHolmes.
"Oh, no, sir! He was too good and kind to leave me so. Why, all themorning he was saying to me that, whatever happened, I was to betrue; and that even if something quite unforeseen occurred toseparate us, I was always to remember that I was pledged to him, andthat he would claim his pledge sooner or later. It seemed strangetalk for a wedding-morning, but what has happened since gives ameaning to it."
"Most certainly it does. Your own opinion is, then, that someunforeseen catastrophe has occurred to him?"
"Yes, sir. I believe that he foresaw some danger, or else he wouldnot have talked so. And then I think that what he foresaw happened."
"But you have no notion as to what it could have been?"
"None."
"One more question. How did your mother take the matter?"
"She was angry, and said that I was never to speak of the matteragain."
"And your father? Did you tell him?"
"Yes; and he seemed to think, with me, that something had happened,and that I should hear of Hosmer again. As he said, what interestcould anyone have in bringing me to the doors of the church, and thenleaving me? Now, if he had borrowed my money, or if he had married meand got my money settled on him, there might be some reason, butHosmer was very independent about money and never would look at ashilling of mine. And yet, what could have happened? And why could henot write? Oh, it drives me half-mad to think of it, and I can'tsleep a wink at night." She pulled a little handkerchief out of hermuff and began to sob heavily into it.
"I shall glance into the case for you," said Holmes, rising, "and Ihave no doubt that we shall reach some definite result. Let theweight of the matter rest upon me now, and do not let your mind dwellupon it further. Above all, try to let Mr. Hosmer Angel vanish fromyour memory, as he has done from your life."
"Then you don't think I'll see him again?"
"I fear not."
"Then what has happened to him?"
"You will leave that question in my hands. I should like an accuratedescription of him and any letters of his which you can spare."
"I advertised for him in last Saturday's Chronicle," said she. "Hereis the slip and here are four letters from him."
"Thank you. And your address?"
"No. 31 Lyon Place, Camberwell."
"Mr. Angel's address you never had, I understand. Where is yourfather's place of business?"
"He travels for Westhouse & Marbank, the great claret importers ofFenchurch Street."
"Thank you. You have made your statement very clearly. You will leavethe papers here, and remember the advice which I have given you. Letthe whole incident be a sealed book, and do not allow it to affectyour life."
"You are very kind, Mr. Holmes, but I cannot do that. I shall be trueto Hosmer. He shall find me ready when he comes back."
For all the preposterous hat and the vacuous face, there wassomething noble in the simple faith of our visitor which compelledour respect. She laid her little bundle of papers upon the table andwent her way, with a promise to come again whenever she might besummoned.
Sherlock Holmes sat silent for a few minutes with his fingertipsstill pressed together, his legs stretched out in front of him, andhis gaze directed upward to the ceiling. Then he took down from therack the old and oily clay pipe, which was to him as a counsellor,and, having lit it, he leaned back in his chair, with the thick bluecloud-wreaths spinning up from him, and a look of infinite languor inhis face.
"Quite an interesting study, that maiden," he observed. "I found hermore interesting than her little problem, which, by the way, israther a trite one. You will find parallel cases, if you consult myindex, in Andover in '77, and there was something of the sort at TheHague last year. Old as is the idea, however, there were one or twodetails which were new to me. But the maiden herself was mostinstructive."
"You appeared to read a good deal upon her which was quite invisibleto me," I remarked.
"Not invisible but unnoticed, Watson. You did not know where to look,and so you missed all that was important. I can never bring you torealise the importance of sleeves, the suggestiveness of thumb-nails,or the great issues that may hang from a boot-lace. Now, what did yougather from that woman's appearance? Describe it."
"Well, she had a slate-coloured, broad-brimmed straw hat, with afeather of a brickish red. Her jacket was black, with black beadssewn upon it, and a fringe of little black jet ornaments. Her dresswas brown, rather darker than coffee colour, with a little purpleplush at the neck and sleeves. Her gloves were greyish and were wornthrough at the right forefinger. Her boots I didn't observe. She hadsmall round, hanging gold earrings, and a general air of being fairlywell-to-do in a vulgar, comfortable, easy-going way."
Sherlock Holmes clapped his hands softly together and chuckled.
"'Pon my word, Watson, you are coming along wonderfully. You havereally done very well indeed. It is true that you have missedeverything of importance, but you have hit upon the method, and youhave a quick eye for colour. Never trust to general impressions, myboy, but concentrate yourself upon details. My first glance is alwaysat a woman's sleeve. In a man it is perhaps better first to take theknee of the trouser. As you observe, this woman had plush upon hersleeves, which is a most useful material for showing traces. Thedouble line a little above the wrist, where the typewritist pressesagainst the table, was beautifully defined. The sewing-machine, ofthe hand type, leaves a similar mark, but only on the left arm, andon the side of it farthest from the thumb, instead of being rightacross the broadest part, as this was. I then glanced at her face,and, observing the dint of a pince-nez at either side of her nose, Iventured a remark upon short sight and typewriting, which seemed tosurprise her."
"It surprised me."
"But, surely, it was obvious. I was then much surprised andinterested on glancing down to observe that, though the boots whichshe was wearing were not unlike each other, they were really oddones; the one having a slightly decorated toe-cap, and the other aplain one. One was buttoned only in the two lower buttons out offive, and the other at the first, third, and fifth. Now, when you seethat a young lady, otherwise neatly dressed, has come away from homewith odd boots, half-buttoned, it is no great deduction to say thatshe came away in a hurry."
"And what else?" I asked, keenly interested, as I always was, by myfriend's incisive reasoning.
"I noted, in passing, that she had written a note before leaving homebut after being fully dressed. You observed that her right glove wastorn at the forefinger, but you did not apparently see that bothglove and finger were stained with violet ink. She had written in ahurry and dipped her pen too deep. It must have been this morning, orthe mark would not remain clear upon the finger. All this is amusing,though rather elementary, but I must go back to business, Watson.Would you mind reading me the advertised description of Mr. HosmerAngel?"
I held the little printed slip to the light.
"Missing," it said, "on the morning of the fourteenth, a gentlemannamed Hosmer Angel. About five ft. seven in. in height; stronglybuilt, sallow complexion, black hair, a little bald in the centre,bushy, black side-whiskers and moustache; tinted glasses, slightinfirmity of speech. Was dressed, when last seen, in black frock-coatfaced with silk, black waistcoat, gold Albert chain, and grey Harristweed trousers, with brown gaiters over elastic-sided boots. Known tohave been employed in an office in Leadenhall Street. Anybodybringing--"
"That will do," said Holmes. "As to the letters," he continued,glancing over them, "they are very commonplace. Absolutely no clue inthem to Mr. Angel, save that he quotes Balzac once. There is oneremarkable point, however, which will no doubt strike you."
"They are typewritten," I remarked.
"Not only that, but the signature is typewritten. Look at the neatlittle 'Hosmer Angel' at the bottom. There is a date, you see, but nosuperscription except Leadenhall Street, which is rather vague. Thepoint about the signature is very suggestive--in fact, we may call itconclusive."
"Of what?"
"My dear fellow, is it possible you do not see how strongly it bearsupon the case?"
"I cannot say that I do unless it were that he wished to be able todeny his signature if an action for breach of promise wereinstituted."
"No, that was not the point. However, I shall write two letters,which should settle the matter. One is to a firm in the City, theother is to the young lady's stepfather, Mr. Windibank, asking himwhether he could meet us here at six o'clock tomorrow evening. It isjust as well that we should do business with the male relatives. Andnow, Doctor, we can do nothing until the answers to those letterscome, so we may put our little problem upon the shelf for theinterim."
I had had so many reasons to believe in my friend's subtle powers ofreasoning and extraordinary energy in action that I felt that he musthave some solid grounds for the assured and easy demeanour with whichhe treated the singular mystery which he had been called upon tofathom. Once only had I known him to fail, in the case of the King ofBohemia and of the Irene Adler photograph; but when I looked back tothe weird business of the Sign of Four, and the extraordinarycircumstances connected with the Study in Scarlet, I felt that itwould be a strange tangle indeed which he could not unravel.
I left him then, still puffing at his black clay pipe, with theconviction that when I came again on the next evening I would findthat he held in his hands all the clues which would lead up to theidentity of the disappearing bridegroom of Miss Mary Sutherland.
A professional case of great gravity was engaging my own attention atthe time, and the whole of next day I was busy at the bedside of thesufferer. It was not until close upon six o'clock that I found myselffree and was able to spring into a hansom and drive to Baker Street,half afraid that I might be too late to assist at the dnouement ofthe little mystery. I found Sherlock Holmes alone, however, halfasleep, with his long, thin form curled up in the recesses of hisarmchair. A formidable array of bottles and test-tubes, with thepungent cleanly smell of hydrochloric acid, told me that he had spenthis day in the chemical work which was so dear to him.
"Well, have you solved it?" I asked as I entered.
"Yes. It was the bisulphate of baryta."
"No, no, the mystery!" I cried.
"Oh, that! I thought of the salt that I have been working upon. Therewas never any mystery in the matter, though, as I said yesterday,some of the details are of interest. The only drawback is that thereis no law, I fear, that can touch the scoundrel."
"Who was he, then, and what was his object in deserting MissSutherland?"
The question was hardly out of my mouth, and Holmes had not yetopened his lips to reply, when we heard a heavy footfall in thepassage and a tap at the door.
"This is the girl's stepfather, Mr. James Windibank," said Holmes."He has written to me to say that he would be here at six. Come in!"
The man who entered was a sturdy, middle-sized fellow, some thirtyyears of age, clean-shaven, and sallow-skinned, with a bland,insinuating manner, and a pair of wonderfully sharp and penetratinggrey eyes. He shot a questioning glance at each of us, placed hisshiny top-hat upon the sideboard, and with a slight bow sidled downinto the nearest chair.
"Good-evening, Mr. James Windibank," said Holmes. "I think that thistypewritten letter is from you, in which you made an appointment withme for six o'clock?"
"Yes, sir. I am afraid that I am a little late, but I am not quite myown master, you know. I am sorry that Miss Sutherland has troubledyou about this little matter, for I think it is far better not towash linen of the sort in public. It was quite against my wishes thatshe came, but she is a very excitable, impulsive girl, as you mayhave noticed, and she is not easily controlled when she has made upher mind on a point. Of course, I did not mind you so much, as youare not connected with the official police, but it is not pleasant tohave a family misfortune like this noised abroad. Besides, it is auseless expense, for how could you possibly find this Hosmer Angel?"
"On the contrary," said Holmes quietly; "I have every reason tobelieve that I will succeed in discovering Mr. Hosmer Angel."
Mr. Windibank gave a violent start and dropped his gloves. "I amdelighted to hear it," he said.
"It is a curious thing," remarked Holmes, "that a typewriter hasreally quite as much individuality as a man's handwriting. Unlessthey are quite new, no two of them write exactly alike. Some lettersget more worn than others, and some wear only on one side. Now, youremark in this note of yours, Mr. Windibank, that in every case thereis some little slurring over of the 'e,' and a slight defect in thetail of the 'r.' There are fourteen other characteristics, but thoseare the more obvious."
"We do all our correspondence with this machine at the office, and nodoubt it is a little worn," our visitor answered, glancing keenly atHolmes with his bright little eyes.
"And now I will show you what is really a very interesting study, Mr.Windibank," Holmes continued. "I think of writing another littlemonograph some of these days on the typewriter and its relation tocrime. It is a subject to which I have devoted some little attention.I have here four letters which purport to come from the missing man.They are all typewritten. In each case, not only are the 'e's'slurred and the 'r's' tailless, but you will observe, if you care touse my magnifying lens, that the fourteen other characteristics towhich I have alluded are there as well."
Mr. Windibank sprang out of his chair and picked up his hat. "Icannot waste time over this sort of fantastic talk, Mr. Holmes," hesaid. "If you can catch the man, catch him, and let me know when youhave done it."
"Certainly," said Holmes, stepping over and turning the key in thedoor. "I let you know, then, that I have caught him!"
"What! where?" shouted Mr. Windibank, turning white to his lips andglancing about him like a rat in a trap.
"Oh, it won't do--really it won't," said Holmes suavely. "There is nopossible getting out of it, Mr. Windibank. It is quite tootransparent, and it was a very bad compliment when you said that itwas impossible for me to solve so simple a question. That's right!Sit down and let us talk it over."
Our visitor collapsed into a chair, with a ghastly face and a glitterof moisture on his brow. "It--it's not actionable," he stammered.
"I am very much afraid that it is not. But between ourselves,Windibank, it was as cruel and selfish and heartless a trick in apetty way as ever came before me. Now, let me just run over thecourse of events, and you will contradict me if I go wrong."
The man sat huddled up in his chair, with his head sunk upon hisbreast, like one who is utterly crushed. Holmes stuck his feet up onthe corner of the mantelpiece and, leaning back with his hands in hispockets, began talking, rather to himself, as it seemed, than to us.
"The man married a woman very much older than himself for her money,"said he, "and he enjoyed the use of the money of the daughter as longas she lived with them. It was a considerable sum, for people intheir position, and the loss of it would have made a seriousdifference. It was worth an effort to preserve it. The daughter wasof a good, amiable disposition, but affectionate and warm-hearted inher ways, so that it was evident that with her fair personaladvantages, and her little income, she would not be allowed to remainsingle long. Now her marriage would mean, of course, the loss of ahundred a year, so what does her stepfather do to prevent it? Hetakes the obvious course of keeping her at home and forbidding her toseek the company of people of her own age. But soon he found thatthat would not answer forever. She became restive, insisted upon herrights, and finally announced her positive intention of going to acertain ball. What does her clever stepfather do then? He conceivesan idea more creditable to his head than to his heart. With theconnivance and assistance of his wife he disguised himself, coveredthose keen eyes with tinted glasses, masked the face with a moustacheand a pair of bushy whiskers, sunk that clear voice into aninsinuating whisper, and doubly secure on account of the girl's shortsight, he appears as Mr. Hosmer Angel, and keeps off other lovers bymaking love himself."
"It was only a joke at first," groaned our visitor. "We never thoughtthat she would have been so carried away."
"Very likely not. However that may be, the young lady was verydecidedly carried away, and, having quite made up her mind that herstepfather was in France, the suspicion of treachery never for aninstant entered her mind. She was flattered by the gentleman'sattentions, and the effect was increased by the loudly expressedadmiration of her mother. Then Mr. Angel began to call, for it wasobvious that the matter should be pushed as far as it would go if areal effect were to be produced. There were meetings, and anengagement, which would finally secure the girl's affections fromturning towards anyone else. But the deception could not be kept upforever. These pretended journeys to France were rather cumbrous. Thething to do was clearly to bring the business to an end in such adramatic manner that it would leave a permanent impression upon theyoung lady's mind and prevent her from looking upon any other suitorfor some time to come. Hence those vows of fidelity exacted upon aTestament, and hence also the allusions to a possibility of somethinghappening on the very morning of the wedding. James Windibank wishedMiss Sutherland to be so bound to Hosmer Angel, and so uncertain asto his fate, that for ten years to come, at any rate, she would notlisten to another man. As far as the church door he brought her, andthen, as he could go no farther, he conveniently vanished away by theold trick of stepping in at one door of a four-wheeler and out at theother. I think that was the chain of events, Mr. Windibank!"
Our visitor had recovered something of his assurance while Holmes hadbeen talking, and he rose from his chair now with a cold sneer uponhis pale face.
"It may be so, or it may not, Mr. Holmes," said he, "but if you areso very sharp you ought to be sharp enough to know that it is you whoare breaking the law now, and not me. I have done nothing actionablefrom the first, but as long as you keep that door locked you layyourself open to an action for assault and illegal constraint."
"The law cannot, as you say, touch you," said Holmes, unlocking andthrowing open the door, "yet there never was a man who deservedpunishment more. If the young lady has a brother or a friend, heought to lay a whip across your shoulders. By Jove!" he continued,flushing up at the sight of the bitter sneer upon the man's face, "itis not part of my duties to my client, but here's a hunting crophandy, and I think I shall just treat myself to--" He took two swiftsteps to the whip, but before he could grasp it there was a wildclatter of steps upon the stairs, the heavy hall door banged, andfrom the window we could see Mr. James Windibank running at the topof his speed down the road.
"There's a cold-blooded scoundrel!" said Holmes, laughing, as hethrew himself down into his chair once more. "That fellow will risefrom crime to crime until he does something very bad, and ends on agallows. The case has, in some respects, been not entirely devoid ofinterest."
"I cannot now entirely see all the steps of your reasoning," Iremarked.
"Well, of course it was obvious from the first that this Mr. HosmerAngel must have some strong object for his curious conduct, and itwas equally clear that the only man who really profited by theincident, as far as we could see, was the stepfather. Then the factthat the two men were never together, but that the one alwaysappeared when the other was away, was suggestive. So were the tintedspectacles and the curious voice, which both hinted at a disguise, asdid the bushy whiskers. My suspicions were all confirmed by hispeculiar action in typewriting his signature, which, of course,inferred that his handwriting was so familiar to her that she wouldrecognise even the smallest sample of it. You see all these isolatedfacts, together with many minor ones, all pointed in the samedirection."
"And how did you verify them?"
"Having once spotted my man, it was easy to get corroboration. I knewthe firm for which this man worked. Having taken the printeddescription, I eliminated everything from it which could be theresult of a disguise--the whiskers, the glasses, the voice, and Isent it to the firm, with a request that they would inform me whetherit answered to the description of any of their travellers. I hadalready noticed the peculiarities of the typewriter, and I wrote tothe man himself at his business address asking him if he would comehere. As I expected, his reply was typewritten and revealed the sametrivial but characteristic defects. The same post brought me a letterfrom Westhouse & Marbank, of Fenchurch Street, to say that thedescription tallied in every respect with that of their employee,James Windibank. Voil tout!"
"And Miss Sutherland?"
"If I tell her she will not believe me. You may remember the oldPersian saying, 'There is danger for him who taketh the tiger cub,and danger also for whoso snatches a delusion from a woman.' There isas much sense in Hafiz as in Horace, and as much knowledge of theworld."





                      THE BOSCOMBE VALLEY MYSTERY
We were seated at breakfast one morning, my wife and I, when the maidbrought in a telegram. It was from Sherlock Holmes and ran in thisway:
"Have you a couple of days to spare? Have just been wired for fromthe west of England in connection with Boscombe Valley tragedy. Shallbe glad if you will come with me. Air and scenery perfect. LeavePaddington by the 11.15.""What do you say, dear?" said my wife, looking across at me. "Willyou go?" 
"I really don't know what to say. I have a fairly long list atpresent."
"Oh, Anstruther would do your work for you. You have been looking alittle pale lately. I think that the change would do you good, andyou are always so interested in Mr. Sherlock Holmes' cases."
"I should be ungrateful if I were not, seeing what I gained throughone of them," I answered. "But if I am to go, I must pack at once,for I have only half an hour."
My experience of camp life in Afghanistan had at least had the effectof making me a prompt and ready traveller. My wants were few andsimple, so that in less than the time stated I was in a cab with myvalise, rattling away to Paddington Station. Sherlock Holmes waspacing up and down the platform, his tall, gaunt figure made evengaunter and taller by his long grey travelling-cloak andclose-fitting cloth cap.
"It is really very good of you to come, Watson," said he. "It makes aconsiderable difference to me, having someone with me on whom I canthoroughly rely. Local aid is always either worthless or elsebiassed. If you will keep the two corner seats I shall get thetickets."
We had the carriage to ourselves save for an immense litter of paperswhich Holmes had brought with him. Among these he rummaged and read,with intervals of note-taking and of meditation, until we were pastReading. Then he suddenly rolled them all into a gigantic ball andtossed them up onto the rack.
"Have you heard anything of the case?" he asked.
"Not a word. I have not seen a paper for some days."
"The London press has not had very full accounts. I have just beenlooking through all the recent papers in order to master theparticulars. It seems, from what I gather, to be one of those simplecases which are so extremely difficult."
"That sounds a little paradoxical."
"But it is profoundly true. Singularity is almost invariably a clue.The more featureless and commonplace a crime is, the more difficultit is to bring it home. In this case, however, they have establisheda very serious case against the son of the murdered man."
"It is a murder, then?"
"Well, it is conjectured to be so. I shall take nothing for granteduntil I have the opportunity of looking personally into it. I willexplain the state of things to you, as far as I have been able tounderstand it, in a very few words.
"Boscombe Valley is a country district not very far from Ross, inHerefordshire. The largest landed proprietor in that part is a Mr.John Turner, who made his money in Australia and returned some yearsago to the old country. One of the farms which he held, that ofHatherley, was let to Mr. Charles McCarthy, who was also anex-Australian. The men had known each other in the colonies, so thatit was not unnatural that when they came to settle down they shoulddo so as near each other as possible. Turner was apparently thericher man, so McCarthy became his tenant but still remained, itseems, upon terms of perfect equality, as they were frequentlytogether. McCarthy had one son, a lad of eighteen, and Turner had anonly daughter of the same age, but neither of them had wives living.They appear to have avoided the society of the neighbouring Englishfamilies and to have led retired lives, though both the McCarthyswere fond of sport and were frequently seen at the race-meetings ofthe neighbourhood. McCarthy kept two servants--a man and a girl.Turner had a considerable household, some half-dozen at the least.That is as much as I have been able to gather about the families. Nowfor the facts.
"On June 3rd, that is, on Monday last, McCarthy left his house atHatherley about three in the afternoon and walked down to theBoscombe Pool, which is a small lake formed by the spreading out ofthe stream which runs down the Boscombe Valley. He had been out withhis serving-man in the morning at Ross, and he had told the man thathe must hurry, as he had an appointment of importance to keep atthree. From that appointment he never came back alive.
"From Hatherley Farm-house to the Boscombe Pool is a quarter of amile, and two people saw him as he passed over this ground. One wasan old woman, whose name is not mentioned, and the other was WilliamCrowder, a game-keeper in the employ of Mr. Turner. Both thesewitnesses depose that Mr. McCarthy was walking alone. The game-keeperadds that within a few minutes of his seeing Mr. McCarthy pass he hadseen his son, Mr. James McCarthy, going the same way with a gun underhis arm. To the best of his belief, the father was actually in sightat the time, and the son was following him. He thought no more of thematter until he heard in the evening of the tragedy that hadoccurred.
"The two McCarthys were seen after the time when William Crowder, thegame-keeper, lost sight of them. The Boscombe Pool is thickly woodedround, with just a fringe of grass and of reeds round the edge. Agirl of fourteen, Patience Moran, who is the daughter of thelodge-keeper of the Boscombe Valley estate, was in one of the woodspicking flowers. She states that while she was there she saw, at theborder of the wood and close by the lake, Mr. McCarthy and his son,and that they appeared to be having a violent quarrel. She heard Mr.McCarthy the elder using very strong language to his son, and she sawthe latter raise up his hand as if to strike his father. She was sofrightened by their violence that she ran away and told her motherwhen she reached home that she had left the two McCarthys quarrellingnear Boscombe Pool, and that she was afraid that they were going tofight. She had hardly said the words when young Mr. McCarthy camerunning up to the lodge to say that he had found his father dead inthe wood, and to ask for the help of the lodge-keeper. He was muchexcited, without either his gun or his hat, and his right hand andsleeve were observed to be stained with fresh blood. On following himthey found the dead body stretched out upon the grass beside thepool. The head had been beaten in by repeated blows of some heavy andblunt weapon. The injuries were such as might very well have beeninflicted by the butt-end of his son's gun, which was found lying onthe grass within a few paces of the body. Under these circumstancesthe young man was instantly arrested, and a verdict of 'wilfulmurder' having been returned at the inquest on Tuesday, he was onWednesday brought before the magistrates at Ross, who have referredthe case to the next Assizes. Those are the main facts of the case asthey came out before the coroner and the police-court."
"I could hardly imagine a more damning case," I remarked. "If evercircumstantial evidence pointed to a criminal it does so here."
"Circumstantial evidence is a very tricky thing," answered Holmesthoughtfully. "It may seem to point very straight to one thing, butif you shift your own point of view a little, you may find itpointing in an equally uncompromising manner to something entirelydifferent. It must be confessed, however, that the case looksexceedingly grave against the young man, and it is very possible thathe is indeed the culprit. There are several people in theneighbourhood, however, and among them Miss Turner, the daughter ofthe neighbouring landowner, who believe in his innocence, and whohave retained Lestrade, whom you may recollect in connection with theStudy in Scarlet, to work out the case in his interest. Lestrade,being rather puzzled, has referred the case to me, and hence it isthat two middle-aged gentlemen are flying westward at fifty miles anhour instead of quietly digesting their breakfasts at home."
"I am afraid," said I, "that the facts are so obvious that you willfind little credit to be gained out of this case."
"There is nothing more deceptive than an obvious fact," he answered,laughing. "Besides, we may chance to hit upon some other obviousfacts which may have been by no means obvious to Mr. Lestrade. Youknow me too well to think that I am boasting when I say that I shalleither confirm or destroy his theory by means which he is quiteincapable of employing, or even of understanding. To take the firstexample to hand, I very clearly perceive that in your bedroom thewindow is upon the right-hand side, and yet I question whether Mr.Lestrade would have noted even so self-evident a thing as that."
"How on earth--"
"My dear fellow, I know you well. I know the military neatness whichcharacterises you. You shave every morning, and in this season youshave by the sunlight; but since your shaving is less and lesscomplete as we get farther back on the left side, until it becomespositively slovenly as we get round the angle of the jaw, it issurely very clear that that side is less illuminated than the other.I could not imagine a man of your habits looking at himself in anequal light and being satisfied with such a result. I only quote thisas a trivial example of observation and inference. Therein lies mymtier, and it is just possible that it may be of some service in theinvestigation which lies before us. There are one or two minor pointswhich were brought out in the inquest, and which are worthconsidering."
"What are they?"
"It appears that his arrest did not take place at once, but after thereturn to Hatherley Farm. On the inspector of constabulary informinghim that he was a prisoner, he remarked that he was not surprised tohear it, and that it was no more than his deserts. This observationof his had the natural effect of removing any traces of doubt whichmight have remained in the minds of the coroner's jury."
"It was a confession," I ejaculated.
"No, for it was followed by a protestation of innocence."
"Coming on the top of such a damning series of events, it was atleast a most suspicious remark."
"On the contrary," said Holmes, "it is the brightest rift which I canat present see in the clouds. However innocent he might be, he couldnot be such an absolute imbecile as not to see that the circumstanceswere very black against him. Had he appeared surprised at his ownarrest, or feigned indignation at it, I should have looked upon it ashighly suspicious, because such surprise or anger would not benatural under the circumstances, and yet might appear to be the bestpolicy to a scheming man. His frank acceptance of the situation markshim as either an innocent man, or else as a man of considerableself-restraint and firmness. As to his remark about his deserts, itwas also not unnatural if you consider that he stood beside the deadbody of his father, and that there is no doubt that he had that veryday so far forgotten his filial duty as to bandy words with him, andeven, according to the little girl whose evidence is so important, toraise his hand as if to strike him. The self-reproach and contritionwhich are displayed in his remark appear to me to be the signs of ahealthy mind rather than of a guilty one."
I shook my head. "Many men have been hanged on far slighterevidence," I remarked.
"So they have. And many men have been wrongfully hanged."
"What is the young man's own account of the matter?"
"It is, I am afraid, not very encouraging to his supporters, thoughthere are one or two points in it which are suggestive. You will findit here, and may read it for yourself."
He picked out from his bundle a copy of the local Herefordshirepaper, and having turned down the sheet he pointed out the paragraphin which the unfortunate young man had given his own statement ofwhat had occurred. I settled myself down in the corner of thecarriage and read it very carefully. It ran in this way:
"Mr. James McCarthy, the only son of the deceased, was then calledand gave evidence as follows: 'I had been away from home for threedays at Bristol, and had only just returned upon the morning of lastMonday, the 3rd. My father was absent from home at the time of myarrival, and I was informed by the maid that he had driven over toRoss with John Cobb, the groom. Shortly after my return I heard thewheels of his trap in the yard, and, looking out of my window, I sawhim get out and walk rapidly out of the yard, though I was not awarein which direction he was going. I then took my gun and strolled outin the direction of the Boscombe Pool, with the intention of visitingthe rabbit warren which is upon the other side. On my way I sawWilliam Crowder, the game-keeper, as he had stated in his evidence;but he is mistaken in thinking that I was following my father. I hadno idea that he was in front of me. When about a hundred yards fromthe pool I heard a cry of "Cooee!" which was a usual signal betweenmy father and myself. I then hurried forward, and found him standingby the pool. He appeared to be much surprised at seeing me and askedme rather roughly what I was doing there. A conversation ensued whichled to high words and almost to blows, for my father was a man of avery violent temper. Seeing that his passion was becomingungovernable, I left him and returned towards Hatherley Farm. I hadnot gone more than 150 yards, however, when I heard a hideous outcrybehind me, which caused me to run back again. I found my fatherexpiring upon the ground, with his head terribly injured. I droppedmy gun and held him in my arms, but he almost instantly expired. Iknelt beside him for some minutes, and then made my way to Mr.Turner's lodge-keeper, his house being the nearest, to ask forassistance. I saw no one near my father when I returned, and I haveno idea how he came by his injuries. He was not a popular man, beingsomewhat cold and forbidding in his manners, but he had, as far as Iknow, no active enemies. I know nothing further of the matter.'"The Coroner: Did your father make any statement to you before hedied?"Witness: He mumbled a few words, but I could only catch someallusion to a rat."The Coroner: What did you understand by that?"Witness: It conveyed no meaning to me. I thought that he wasdelirious."The Coroner: What was the point upon which you and your father hadthis final quarrel?"Witness: I should prefer not to answer."The Coroner: I am afraid that I must press it."Witness: It is really impossible for me to tell you. I can assureyou that it has nothing to do with the sad tragedy which followed."The Coroner: That is for the court to decide. I need not point outto you that your refusal to answer will prejudice your caseconsiderably in any future proceedings which may arise."Witness: I must still refuse."The Coroner: I understand that the cry of 'Cooee' was a commonsignal between you and your father?"Witness: It was."The Coroner: How was it, then, that he uttered it before he saw you,and before he even knew that you had returned from Bristol?"Witness (with considerable confusion): I do not know."A Juryman: Did you see nothing which aroused your suspicions whenyou returned on hearing the cry and found your father fatallyinjured?"Witness: Nothing definite."The Coroner: What do you mean?"Witness: I was so disturbed and excited as I rushed out into theopen, that I could think of nothing except of my father. Yet I have avague impression that as I ran forward something lay upon the groundto the left of me. It seemed to me to be something grey in colour, acoat of some sort, or a plaid perhaps. When I rose from my father Ilooked round for it, but it was gone."'Do you mean that it disappeared before you went for help?'"'Yes, it was gone.'"'You cannot say what it was?'"'No, I had a feeling something was there.'"'How far from the body?'"'A dozen yards or so.'"'And how far from the edge of the wood?'"'About the same.'"'Then if it was removed it was while you were within a dozen yardsof it?'"'Yes, but with my back towards it.'"This concluded the examination of the witness."
"I see," said I as I glanced down the column, "that the coroner inhis concluding remarks was rather severe upon young McCarthy. Hecalls attention, and with reason, to the discrepancy about his fatherhaving signalled to him before seeing him, also to his refusal togive details of his conversation with his father, and his singularaccount of his father's dying words. They are all, as he remarks,very much against the son."
Holmes laughed softly to himself and stretched himself out upon thecushioned seat. "Both you and the coroner have been at some pains,"said he, "to single out the very strongest points in the young man'sfavour. Don't you see that you alternately give him credit for havingtoo much imagination and too little? Too little, if he could notinvent a cause of quarrel which would give him the sympathy of thejury; too much, if he evolved from his own inner consciousnessanything so outr as a dying reference to a rat, and the incident ofthe vanishing cloth. No, sir, I shall approach this case from thepoint of view that what this young man says is true, and we shall seewhither that hypothesis will lead us. And now here is my pocketPetrarch, and not another word shall I say of this case until we areon the scene of action. We lunch at Swindon, and I see that we shallbe there in twenty minutes."
It was nearly four o'clock when we at last, after passing through thebeautiful Stroud Valley, and over the broad gleaming Severn, foundourselves at the pretty little country-town of Ross. A lean,ferret-like man, furtive and sly-looking, was waiting for us upon theplatform. In spite of the light brown dustcoat and leather-leggingswhich he wore in deference to his rustic surroundings, I had nodifficulty in recognising Lestrade, of Scotland Yard. With him wedrove to the Hereford Arms where a room had already been engaged forus.
"I have ordered a carriage," said Lestrade as we sat over a cup oftea. "I knew your energetic nature, and that you would not be happyuntil you had been on the scene of the crime."
"It was very nice and complimentary of you," Holmes answered. "It isentirely a question of barometric pressure."
Lestrade looked startled. "I do not quite follow," he said.
"How is the glass? Twenty-nine, I see. No wind, and not a cloud inthe sky. I have a caseful of cigarettes here which need smoking, andthe sofa is very much superior to the usual country hotelabomination. I do not think that it is probable that I shall use thecarriage to-night."
Lestrade laughed indulgently. "You have, no doubt, already formedyour conclusions from the newspapers," he said. "The case is as plainas a pikestaff, and the more one goes into it the plainer it becomes.Still, of course, one can't refuse a lady, and such a very positiveone, too. She has heard of you, and would have your opinion, though Irepeatedly told her that there was nothing which you could do which Ihad not already done. Why, bless my soul! here is her carriage at thedoor."
He had hardly spoken before there rushed into the room one of themost lovely young women that I have ever seen in my life. Her violeteyes shining, her lips parted, a pink flush upon her cheeks, allthought of her natural reserve lost in her overpowering excitementand concern.
"Oh, Mr. Sherlock Holmes!" she cried, glancing from one to the otherof us, and finally, with a woman's quick intuition, fastening upon mycompanion, "I am so glad that you have come. I have driven down totell you so. I know that James didn't do it. I know it, and I wantyou to start upon your work knowing it, too. Never let yourself doubtupon that point. We have known each other since we were littlechildren, and I know his faults as no one else does; but he is tootender-hearted to hurt a fly. Such a charge is absurd to anyone whoreally knows him."
"I hope we may clear him, Miss Turner," said Sherlock Holmes.  "Youmay rely upon my doing all that I can."
"But you have read the evidence. You have formed some conclusion? Doyou not see some loophole, some flaw? Do you not yourself think thathe is innocent?"
"I think that it is very probable."
"There, now!" she cried, throwing back her head and looking defiantlyat Lestrade. "You hear! He gives me hopes."
Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. "I am afraid that my colleague hasbeen a little quick in forming his conclusions," he said.
"But he is right. Oh! I know that he is right. James never did it.And about his quarrel with his father, I am sure that the reason whyhe would not speak about it to the coroner was because I wasconcerned in it."
"In what way?" asked Holmes.
"It is no time for me to hide anything. James and his father had manydisagreements about me. Mr. McCarthy was very anxious that thereshould be a marriage between us. James and I have always loved eachother as brother and sister; but of course he is young and has seenvery little of life yet, and--and--well, he naturally did not wish todo anything like that yet. So there were quarrels, and this, I amsure, was one of them."
"And your father?" asked Holmes. "Was he in favour of such a union?"
"No, he was averse to it also. No one but Mr. McCarthy was in favourof it." A quick blush passed over her fresh young face as Holmes shotone of his keen, questioning glances at her.
"Thank you for this information," said he. "May I see your father ifI call to-morrow?"
"I am afraid the doctor won't allow it."
"The doctor?"
"Yes, have you not heard? Poor father has never been strong for yearsback, but this has broken him down completely. He has taken to hisbed, and Dr. Willows says that he is a wreck and that his nervoussystem is shattered. Mr. McCarthy was the only man alive who hadknown dad in the old days in Victoria."
"Ha! In Victoria! That is important."
"Yes, at the mines."
"Quite so; at the gold-mines, where, as I understand, Mr. Turner madehis money."
"Yes, certainly."
"Thank you, Miss Turner. You have been of material assistance to me."
"You will tell me if you have any news to-morrow. No doubt you willgo to the prison to see James. Oh, if you do, Mr. Holmes, do tell himthat I know him to be innocent."
"I will, Miss Turner."
"I must go home now, for dad is very ill, and he misses me so if Ileave him. Good-bye, and God help you in your undertaking." Shehurried from the room as impulsively as she had entered, and we heardthe wheels of her carriage rattle off down the street.
"I am ashamed of you, Holmes," said Lestrade with dignity after a fewminutes' silence. "Why should you raise up hopes which you are boundto disappoint? I am not over-tender of heart, but I call it cruel."
"I think that I see my way to clearing James McCarthy," said Holmes."Have you an order to see him in prison?"
"Yes, but only for you and me."
"Then I shall reconsider my resolution about going out. We have stilltime to take a train to Hereford and see him to-night?"
"Ample."
"Then let us do so. Watson, I fear that you will find it very slow,but I shall only be away a couple of hours."
I walked down to the station with them, and then wandered through thestreets of the little town, finally returning to the hotel, where Ilay upon the sofa and tried to interest myself in a yellow-backednovel. The puny plot of the story was so thin, however, when comparedto the deep mystery through which we were groping, and I found myattention wander so continually from the action to the fact, that Iat last flung it across the room and gave myself up entirely to aconsideration of the events of the day. Supposing that this unhappyyoung man's story were absolutely true, then what hellish thing, whatabsolutely unforeseen and extraordinary calamity could have occurredbetween the time when he parted from his father, and the moment when,drawn back by his screams, he rushed into the glade? It was somethingterrible and deadly. What could it be? Might not the nature of theinjuries reveal something to my medical instincts? I rang the belland called for the weekly county paper, which contained a verbatimaccount of the inquest. In the surgeon's deposition it was statedthat the posterior third of the left parietal bone and the left halfof the occipital bone had been shattered by a heavy blow from a bluntweapon. I marked the spot upon my own head. Clearly such a blow musthave been struck from behind. That was to some extent in favour ofthe accused, as when seen quarrelling he was face to face with hisfather. Still, it did not go for very much, for the older man mighthave turned his back before the blow fell. Still, it might be worthwhile to call Holmes' attention to it. Then there was the peculiardying reference to a rat. What could that mean? It could not bedelirium. A man dying from a sudden blow does not commonly becomedelirious. No, it was more likely to be an attempt to explain how hemet his fate. But what could it indicate? I cudgelled my brains tofind some possible explanation. And then the incident of the greycloth seen by young McCarthy. If that were true the murderer musthave dropped some part of his dress, presumably his overcoat, in hisflight, and must have had the hardihood to return and to carry itaway at the instant when the son was kneeling with his back turnednot a dozen paces off. What a tissue of mysteries and improbabilitiesthe whole thing was! I did not wonder at Lestrade's opinion, and yetI had so much faith in Sherlock Holmes' insight that I could not losehope as long as every fresh fact seemed to strengthen his convictionof young McCarthy's innocence.
It was late before Sherlock Holmes returned. He came back alone, forLestrade was staying in lodgings in the town.
"The glass still keeps very high," he remarked as he sat down. "It isof importance that it should not rain before we are able to go overthe ground. On the other hand, a man should be at his very best andkeenest for such nice work as that, and I did not wish to do it whenfagged by a long journey. I have seen young McCarthy."
"And what did you learn from him?"
"Nothing."
"Could he throw no light?"
"None at all. I was inclined to think at one time that he knew whohad done it and was screening him or her, but I am convinced now thathe is as puzzled as everyone else. He is not a very quick-wittedyouth, though comely to look at and, I should think, sound at heart."
"I cannot admire his taste," I remarked, "if it is indeed a fact thathe was averse to a marriage with so charming a young lady as thisMiss Turner."
"Ah, thereby hangs a rather painful tale. This fellow is madly,insanely, in love with her, but some two years ago, when he was onlya lad, and before he really knew her, for she had been away fiveyears at a boarding-school, what does the idiot do but get into theclutches of a barmaid in Bristol and marry her at a registry office?No one knows a word of the matter, but you can imagine how maddeningit must be to him to be upbraided for not doing what he would givehis very eyes to do, but what he knows to be absolutely impossible.It was sheer frenzy of this sort which made him throw his hands upinto the air when his father, at their last interview, was goadinghim on to propose to Miss Turner. On the other hand, he had no meansof supporting himself, and his father, who was by all accounts a veryhard man, would have thrown him over utterly had he known the truth.It was with his barmaid wife that he had spent the last three days inBristol, and his father did not know where he was. Mark that point.It is of importance. Good has come out of evil, however, for thebarmaid, finding from the papers that he is in serious trouble andlikely to be hanged, has thrown him over utterly and has written tohim to say that she has a husband already in the Bermuda Dockyard, sothat there is really no tie between them. I think that that bit ofnews has consoled young McCarthy for all that he has suffered."
"But if he is innocent, who has done it?"
"Ah! who? I would call your attention very particularly to twopoints. One is that the murdered man had an appointment with someoneat the pool, and that the someone could not have been his son, forhis son was away, and he did not know when he would return. Thesecond is that the murdered man was heard to cry 'Cooee!' before heknew that his son had returned. Those are the crucial points uponwhich the case depends. And now let us talk about George Meredith, ifyou please, and we shall leave all minor matters until to-morrow."
There was no rain, as Holmes had foretold, and the morning brokebright and cloudless. At nine o'clock Lestrade called for us with thecarriage, and we set off for Hatherley Farm and the Boscombe Pool.
"There is serious news this morning," Lestrade observed. "It is saidthat Mr. Turner, of the Hall, is so ill that his life is despairedof."
"An elderly man, I presume?" said Holmes.
"About sixty; but his constitution has been shattered by his lifeabroad, and he has been in failing health for some time. Thisbusiness has had a very bad effect upon him. He was an old friend ofMcCarthy's, and, I may add, a great benefactor to him, for I havelearned that he gave him Hatherley Farm rent free."
"Indeed! That is interesting," said Holmes.
"Oh, yes! In a hundred other ways he has helped him. Everybody abouthere speaks of his kindness to him."
"Really! Does it not strike you as a little singular that thisMcCarthy, who appears to have had little of his own, and to have beenunder such obligations to Turner, should still talk of marrying hisson to Turner's daughter, who is, presumably, heiress to the estate,and that in such a very cocksure manner, as if it were merely a caseof a proposal and all else would follow? It is the more strange,since we know that Turner himself was averse to the idea. Thedaughter told us as much. Do you not deduce something from that?"
"We have got to the deductions and the inferences," said Lestrade,winking at me. "I find it hard enough to tackle facts, Holmes,without flying away after theories and fancies."
"You are right," said Holmes demurely; "you do find it very hard totackle the facts."
"Anyhow, I have grasped one fact which you seem to find it difficultto get hold of," replied Lestrade with some warmth.
"And that is--"
"That McCarthy senior met his death from McCarthy junior and that alltheories to the contrary are the merest moonshine."
"Well, moonshine is a brighter thing than fog," said Holmes,laughing. "But I am very much mistaken if this is not Hatherley Farmupon the left."
"Yes, that is it." It was a widespread, comfortable-looking building,two-storied, slate-roofed, with great yellow blotches of lichen uponthe grey walls. The drawn blinds and the smokeless chimneys, however,gave it a stricken look, as though the weight of this horror stilllay heavy upon it. We called at the door, when the maid, at Holmes'request, showed us the boots which her master wore at the time of hisdeath, and also a pair of the son's, though not the pair which he hadthen had. Having measured these very carefully from seven or eightdifferent points, Holmes desired to be led to the court-yard, fromwhich we all followed the winding track which led to Boscombe Pool.
Sherlock Holmes was transformed when he was hot upon such a scent asthis. Men who had only known the quiet thinker and logician of BakerStreet would have failed to recognise him. His face flushed anddarkened. His brows were drawn into two hard black lines, while hiseyes shone out from beneath them with a steely glitter. His face wasbent downward, his shoulders bowed, his lips compressed, and theveins stood out like whipcord in his long, sinewy neck. His nostrilsseemed to dilate with a purely animal lust for the chase, and hismind was so absolutely concentrated upon the matter before him that aquestion or remark fell unheeded upon his ears, or, at the most, onlyprovoked a quick, impatient snarl in reply. Swiftly and silently hemade his way along the track which ran through the meadows, and so byway of the woods to the Boscombe Pool. It was damp, marshy ground, asis all that district, and there were marks of many feet, both uponthe path and amid the short grass which bounded it on either side.Sometimes Holmes would hurry on, sometimes stop dead, and once hemade quite a little detour into the meadow. Lestrade and I walkedbehind him, the detective indifferent and contemptuous, while Iwatched my friend with the interest which sprang from the convictionthat every one of his actions was directed towards a definite end.
The Boscombe Pool, which is a little reed-girt sheet of water somefifty yards across, is situated at the boundary between the HatherleyFarm and the private park of the wealthy Mr. Turner. Above the woodswhich lined it upon the farther side we could see the red, juttingpinnacles which marked the site of the rich landowner's dwelling. Onthe Hatherley side of the pool the woods grew very thick, and therewas a narrow belt of sodden grass twenty paces across between theedge of the trees and the reeds which lined the lake. Lestrade showedus the exact spot at which the body had been found, and, indeed, somoist was the ground, that I could plainly see the traces which hadbeen left by the fall of the stricken man. To Holmes, as I could seeby his eager face and peering eyes, very many other things were to beread upon the trampled grass. He ran round, like a dog who is pickingup a scent, and then turned upon my companion.
"What did you go into the pool for?" he asked.
"I fished about with a rake. I thought there might be some weapon orother trace. But how on earth--"
"Oh, tut, tut! I have no time! That left foot of yours with itsinward twist is all over the place. A mole could trace it, and thereit vanishes among the reeds. Oh, how simple it would all have beenhad I been here before they came like a herd of buffalo and wallowedall over it. Here is where the party with the lodge-keeper came, andthey have covered all tracks for six or eight feet round the body.But here are three separate tracks of the same feet." He drew out alens and lay down upon his waterproof to have a better view, talkingall the time rather to himself than to us. "These are youngMcCarthy's feet. Twice he was walking, and once he ran swiftly, sothat the soles are deeply marked and the heels hardly visible. Thatbears out his story. He ran when he saw his father on the ground.Then here are the father's feet as he paced up and down. What isthis, then? It is the butt-end of the gun as the son stood listening.And this? Ha, ha! What have we here? Tiptoes! tiptoes! Square, too,quite unusual boots! They come, they go, they come again--of coursethat was for the cloak. Now where did they come from?" He ran up anddown, sometimes losing, sometimes finding the track until we werewell within the edge of the wood and under the shadow of a greatbeech, the largest tree in the neighbourhood. Holmes traced his wayto the farther side of this and lay down once more upon his face witha little cry of satisfaction. For a long time he remained there,turning over the leaves and dried sticks, gathering up what seemed tome to be dust into an envelope and examining with his lens not onlythe ground but even the bark of the tree as far as he could reach. Ajagged stone was lying among the moss, and this also he carefullyexamined and retained. Then he followed a pathway through the wooduntil he came to the highroad, where all traces were lost.
"It has been a case of considerable interest," he remarked, returningto his natural manner. "I fancy that this grey house on the rightmust be the lodge. I think that I will go in and have a word withMoran, and perhaps write a little note. Having done that, we maydrive back to our luncheon. You may walk to the cab, and I shall bewith you presently."
It was about ten minutes before we regained our cab and drove backinto Ross, Holmes still carrying with him the stone which he hadpicked up in the wood.
"This may interest you, Lestrade," he remarked, holding it out.  "Themurder was done with it."
"I see no marks."
"There are none."
"How do you know, then?"
"The grass was growing under it. It had only lain there a few days.There was no sign of a place whence it had been taken. It correspondswith the injuries. There is no sign of any other weapon."
"And the murderer?"
"Is a tall man, left-handed, limps with the right leg, wearsthick-soled shooting-boots and a grey cloak, smokes Indian cigars,uses a cigar-holder, and carries a blunt pen-knife in his pocket.There are several other indications, but these may be enough to aidus in our search."
Lestrade laughed. "I am afraid that I am still a sceptic," he said."Theories are all very well, but we have to deal with a hard-headedBritish jury."
"Nous verrons," answered Holmes calmly. "You work your own method,and I shall work mine. I shall be busy this afternoon, and shallprobably return to London by the evening train."
"And leave your case unfinished?"
"No, finished."
"But the mystery?"
"It is solved."
"Who was the criminal, then?"
"The gentleman I describe."
"But who is he?"
"Surely it would not be difficult to find out. This is not such apopulous neighbourhood."
Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. "I am a practical man," he said,"and I really cannot undertake to go about the country looking for aleft-handed gentleman with a game leg. I should become thelaughing-stock of Scotland Yard."
"All right," said Holmes quietly. "I have given you the chance. Hereare your lodgings. Good-bye. I shall drop you a line before I leave."
Having left Lestrade at his rooms, we drove to our hotel, where wefound lunch upon the table. Holmes was silent and buried in thoughtwith a pained expression upon his face, as one who finds himself in aperplexing position.
"Look here, Watson," he said when the cloth was cleared "just sitdown in this chair and let me preach to you for a little. I don'tknow quite what to do, and I should value your advice. Light a cigarand let me expound."
"Pray do so."
"Well, now, in considering this case there are two points about youngMcCarthy's narrative which struck us both instantly, although theyimpressed me in his favour and you against him. One was the fact thathis father should, according to his account, cry 'Cooee!' beforeseeing him. The other was his singular dying reference to a rat. Hemumbled several words, you understand, but that was all that caughtthe son's ear. Now from this double point our research must commence,and we will begin it by presuming that what the lad says isabsolutely true."
"What of this 'Cooee!' then?"
"Well, obviously it could not have been meant for the son. The son,as far as he knew, was in Bristol. It was mere chance that he waswithin earshot. The 'Cooee!' was meant to attract the attention ofwhoever it was that he had the appointment with. But 'Cooee' is adistinctly Australian cry, and one which is used between Australians.There is a strong presumption that the person whom McCarthy expectedto meet him at Boscombe Pool was someone who had been in Australia."
"What of the rat, then?"
Sherlock Holmes took a folded paper from his pocket and flattened itout on the table. "This is a map of the Colony of Victoria," he said."I wired to Bristol for it last night." He put his hand over part ofthe map. "What do you read?"
"ARAT," I read.
"And now?" He raised his hand.
"BALLARAT."
"Quite so. That was the word the man uttered, and of which his sononly caught the last two syllables. He was trying to utter the nameof his murderer. So and so, of Ballarat."
"It is wonderful!" I exclaimed.
"It is obvious. And now, you see, I had narrowed the field downconsiderably. The possession of a grey garment was a third pointwhich, granting the son's statement to be correct, was a certainty.We have come now out of mere vagueness to the definite conception ofan Australian from Ballarat with a grey cloak."
"Certainly."
"And one who was at home in the district, for the pool can only beapproached by the farm or by the estate, where strangers could hardlywander."
"Quite so."
"Then comes our expedition of to-day. By an examination of the groundI gained the trifling details which I gave to that imbecile Lestrade,as to the personality of the criminal."
"But how did you gain them?"
"You know my method. It is founded upon the observation of trifles."
"His height I know that you might roughly judge from the length ofhis stride. His boots, too, might be told from their traces."
"Yes, they were peculiar boots."
"But his lameness?"
"The impression of his right foot was always less distinct than hisleft. He put less weight upon it. Why? Because he limped--he waslame."
"But his left-handedness."
"You were yourself struck by the nature of the injury as recorded bythe surgeon at the inquest. The blow was struck from immediatelybehind, and yet was upon the left side. Now, how can that be unlessit were by a left-handed man? He had stood behind that tree duringthe interview between the father and son. He had even smoked there. Ifound the ash of a cigar, which my special knowledge of tobacco ashesenables me to pronounce as an Indian cigar. I have, as you know,devoted some attention to this, and written a little monograph on theashes of 140 different varieties of pipe, cigar, and cigarettetobacco. Having found the ash, I then looked round and discovered thestump among the moss where he had tossed it. It was an Indian cigar,of the variety which are rolled in Rotterdam."
"And the cigar-holder?"
"I could see that the end had not been in his mouth. Therefore heused a holder. The tip had been cut off, not bitten off, but the cutwas not a clean one, so I deduced a blunt pen-knife."
"Holmes," I said, "you have drawn a net round this man from which hecannot escape, and you have saved an innocent human life as truly asif you had cut the cord which was hanging him. I see the direction inwhich all this points. The culprit is--"
"Mr. John Turner," cried the hotel waiter, opening the door of oursitting-room, and ushering in a visitor.
The man who entered was a strange and impressive figure. His slow,limping step and bowed shoulders gave the appearance of decrepitude,and yet his hard, deep-lined, craggy features, and his enormous limbsshowed that he was possessed of unusual strength of body and ofcharacter. His tangled beard, grizzled hair, and outstanding,drooping eyebrows combined to give an air of dignity and power to hisappearance, but his face was of an ashen white, while his lips andthe corners of his nostrils were tinged with a shade of blue. It wasclear to me at a glance that he was in the grip of some deadly andchronic disease.
"Pray sit down on the sofa," said Holmes gently. "You had my note?"
"Yes, the lodge-keeper brought it up. You said that you wished to seeme here to avoid scandal."
"I thought people would talk if I went to the Hall."
"And why did you wish to see me?" He looked across at my companionwith despair in his weary eyes, as though his question was alreadyanswered.
"Yes," said Holmes, answering the look rather than the words. "It isso. I know all about McCarthy."
The old man sank his face in his hands. "God help me!" he cried. "ButI would not have let the young man come to harm. I give you my wordthat I would have spoken out if it went against him at the Assizes."
"I am glad to hear you say so," said Holmes gravely.
"I would have spoken now had it not been for my dear girl. It wouldbreak her heart--it will break her heart when she hears that I amarrested."
"It may not come to that," said Holmes.
"What?"
"I am no official agent. I understand that it was your daughter whorequired my presence here, and I am acting in her interests. YoungMcCarthy must be got off, however."
"I am a dying man," said old Turner. "I have had diabetes for years.My doctor says it is a question whether I shall live a month. Yet Iwould rather die under my own roof than in a jail."
Holmes rose and sat down at the table with his pen in his hand and abundle of paper before him. "Just tell us the truth," he said. "Ishall jot down the facts. You will sign it, and Watson here canwitness it. Then I could produce your confession at the lastextremity to save young McCarthy. I promise you that I shall not useit unless it is absolutely needed."
"It's as well," said the old man; "it's a question whether I shalllive to the Assizes, so it matters little to me, but I should wish tospare Alice the shock. And now I will make the thing clear to you; ithas been a long time in the acting, but will not take me long totell.
"You didn't know this dead man, McCarthy. He was a devil incarnate. Itell you that. God keep you out of the clutches of such a man as he.His grip has been upon me these twenty years, and he has blasted mylife. I'll tell you first how I came to be in his power.
"It was in the early '60's at the diggings. I was a young chap then,hot-blooded and reckless, ready to turn my hand at anything; I gotamong bad companions, took to drink, had no luck with my claim, tookto the bush, and in a word became what you would call over here ahighway robber. There were six of us, and we had a wild, free life ofit, sticking up a station from time to time, or stopping the wagonson the road to the diggings. Black Jack of Ballarat was the name Iwent under, and our party is still remembered in the colony as theBallarat Gang.
"One day a gold convoy came down from Ballarat to Melbourne, and welay in wait for it and attacked it. There were six troopers and sixof us, so it was a close thing, but we emptied four of their saddlesat the first volley. Three of our boys were killed, however, beforewe got the swag. I put my pistol to the head of the wagon-driver, whowas this very man McCarthy. I wish to the Lord that I had shot himthen, but I spared him, though I saw his wicked little eyes fixed onmy face, as though to remember every feature. We got away with thegold, became wealthy men, and made our way over to England withoutbeing suspected. There I parted from my old pals and determined tosettle down to a quiet and respectable life. I bought this estate,which chanced to be in the market, and I set myself to do a littlegood with my money, to make up for the way in which I had earned it.I married, too, and though my wife died young she left me my dearlittle Alice. Even when she was just a baby her wee hand seemed tolead me down the right path as nothing else had ever done. In a word,I turned over a new leaf and did my best to make up for the past. Allwas going well when McCarthy laid his grip upon me.
"I had gone up to town about an investment, and I met him in RegentStreet with hardly a coat to his back or a boot to his foot.
"'Here we are, Jack,' says he, touching me on the arm; 'we'll be asgood as a family to you. There's two of us, me and my son, and youcan have the keeping of us. If you don't--it's a fine, law-abidingcountry is England, and there's always a policeman within hail.'
"Well, down they came to the west country, there was no shaking themoff, and there they have lived rent free on my best land ever since.There was no rest for me, no peace, no forgetfulness; turn where Iwould, there was his cunning, grinning face at my elbow. It grewworse as Alice grew up, for he soon saw I was more afraid of herknowing my past than of the police. Whatever he wanted he must have,and whatever it was I gave him without question, land, money, houses,until at last he asked a thing which I could not give. He asked forAlice.
"His son, you see, had grown up, and so had my girl, and as I wasknown to be in weak health, it seemed a fine stroke to him that hislad should step into the whole property. But there I was firm. Iwould not have his cursed stock mixed with mine; not that I had anydislike to the lad, but his blood was in him, and that was enough. Istood firm. McCarthy threatened. I braved him to do his worst. Wewere to meet at the pool midway between our houses to talk it over.
"When I went down there I found him talking with his son, so I smokeda cigar and waited behind a tree until he should be alone. But as Ilistened to his talk all that was black and bitter in me seemed tocome uppermost. He was urging his son to marry my daughter with aslittle regard for what she might think as if she were a slut from offthe streets. It drove me mad to think that I and all that I held mostdear should be in the power of such a man as this. Could I not snapthe bond? I was already a dying and a desperate man. Though clear ofmind and fairly strong of limb, I knew that my own fate was sealed.But my memory and my girl! Both could be saved if I could but silencethat foul tongue. I did it, Mr. Holmes. I would do it again. Deeplyas I have sinned, I have led a life of martyrdom to atone for it. Butthat my girl should be entangled in the same meshes which held me wasmore than I could suffer. I struck him down with no more compunctionthan if he had been some foul and venomous beast. His cry broughtback his son; but I had gained the cover of the wood, though I wasforced to go back to fetch the cloak which I had dropped in myflight. That is the true story, gentlemen, of all that occurred."
"Well, it is not for me to judge you," said Holmes as the old mansigned the statement which had been drawn out. "I pray that we maynever be exposed to such a temptation."
"I pray not, sir. And what do you intend to do?"
"In view of your health, nothing. You are yourself aware that youwill soon have to answer for your deed at a higher court than theAssizes. I will keep your confession, and if McCarthy is condemned Ishall be forced to use it. If not, it shall never be seen by mortaleye; and your secret, whether you be alive or dead, shall be safewith us."
"Farewell, then," said the old man solemnly. "Your own deathbeds,when they come, will be the easier for the thought of the peace whichyou have given to mine." Tottering and shaking in all his giantframe, he stumbled slowly from the room.
"God help us!" said Holmes after a long silence. "Why does fate playsuch tricks with poor, helpless worms? I never hear of such a case asthis that I do not think of Baxter's words, and say, 'There, but forthe grace of God, goes Sherlock Holmes.'"
James McCarthy was acquitted at the Assizes on the strength of anumber of objections which had been drawn out by Holmes and submittedto the defending counsel. Old Turner lived for seven months after ourinterview, but he is now dead; and there is every prospect that theson and daughter may come to live happily together in ignorance ofthe black cloud which rests upon their past.





                         THE FIVE ORANGE PIPS
When I glance over my notes and records of the Sherlock Holmes casesbetween the years '82 and '90, I am faced by so many which presentstrange and interesting features that it is no easy matter to knowwhich to choose and which to leave. Some, however, have alreadygained publicity through the papers, and others have not offered afield for those peculiar qualities which my friend possessed in sohigh a degree, and which it is the object of these papers toillustrate. Some, too, have baffled his analytical skill, and wouldbe, as narratives, beginnings without an ending, while others havebeen but partially cleared up, and have their explanations foundedrather upon conjecture and surmise than on that absolute logicalproof which was so dear to him. There is, however, one of these lastwhich was so remarkable in its details and so startling in itsresults that I am tempted to give some account of it in spite of thefact that there are points in connection with it which never havebeen, and probably never will be, entirely cleared up.
The year '87 furnished us with a long series of cases of greater orless interest, of which I retain the records. Among my headings underthis one twelve months I find an account of the adventure of theParadol Chamber, of the Amateur Mendicant Society, who held aluxurious club in the lower vault of a furniture warehouse, of thefacts connected with the loss of the British barque "Sophy Anderson",of the singular adventures of the Grice Patersons in the island ofUffa, and finally of the Camberwell poisoning case. In the latter, asmay be remembered, Sherlock Holmes was able, by winding up the deadman's watch, to prove that it had been wound up two hours before, andthat therefore the deceased had gone to bed within that time--adeduction which was of the greatest importance in clearing up thecase. All these I may sketch out at some future date, but none ofthem present such singular features as the strange train ofcircumstances which I have now taken up my pen to describe.
It was in the latter days of September, and the equinoctial gales hadset in with exceptional violence. All day the wind had screamed andthe rain had beaten against the windows, so that even here in theheart of great, hand-made London we were forced to raise our mindsfor the instant from the routine of life and to recognise thepresence of those great elemental forces which shriek at mankindthrough the bars of his civilisation, like untamed beasts in a cage.As evening drew in, the storm grew higher and louder, and the windcried and sobbed like a child in the chimney. Sherlock Holmes satmoodily at one side of the fireplace cross-indexing his records ofcrime, while I at the other was deep in one of Clark Russell's finesea-stories until the howl of the gale from without seemed to blendwith the text, and the splash of the rain to lengthen out into thelong swash of the sea waves. My wife was on a visit to her mother's,and for a few days I was a dweller once more in my old quarters atBaker Street.
"Why," said I, glancing up at my companion, "that was surely thebell. Who could come to-night? Some friend of yours, perhaps?"
"Except yourself I have none," he answered. "I do not encouragevisitors."
"A client, then?"
"If so, it is a serious case. Nothing less would bring a man out onsuch a day and at such an hour. But I take it that it is more likelyto be some crony of the landlady's."
Sherlock Holmes was wrong in his conjecture, however, for there camea step in the passage and a tapping at the door. He stretched out hislong arm to turn the lamp away from himself and towards the vacantchair upon which a newcomer must sit.
"Come in!" said he.
The man who entered was young, some two-and-twenty at the outside,well-groomed and trimly clad, with something of refinement anddelicacy in his bearing. The streaming umbrella which he held in hishand, and his long shining waterproof told of the fierce weatherthrough which he had come. He looked about him anxiously in the glareof the lamp, and I could see that his face was pale and his eyesheavy, like those of a man who is weighed down with some greatanxiety.
"I owe you an apology," he said, raising his golden pince-nez to hiseyes. "I trust that I am not intruding. I fear that I have broughtsome traces of the storm and rain into your snug chamber."
"Give me your coat and umbrella," said Holmes. "They may rest here onthe hook and will be dry presently. You have come up from thesouth-west, I see."
"Yes, from Horsham."
"That clay and chalk mixture which I see upon your toe caps is quitedistinctive."
"I have come for advice."
"That is easily got."
"And help."
"That is not always so easy."
"I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes. I heard from Major Prendergast howyou saved him in the Tankerville Club scandal."
"Ah, of course. He was wrongfully accused of cheating at cards."
"He said that you could solve anything."
"He said too much."
"That you are never beaten."
"I have been beaten four times--three times by men, and once by awoman."
"But what is that compared with the number of your successes?"
"It is true that I have been generally successful."
"Then you may be so with me."
"I beg that you will draw your chair up to the fire and favour mewith some details as to your case."
"It is no ordinary one."
"None of those which come to me are. I am the last court of appeal."
"And yet I question, sir, whether, in all your experience, you haveever listened to a more mysterious and inexplicable chain of eventsthan those which have happened in my own family."
"You fill me with interest," said Holmes. "Pray give us the essentialfacts from the commencement, and I can afterwards question you as tothose details which seem to me to be most important."
The young man pulled his chair up and pushed his wet feet out towardsthe blaze.
"My name," said he, "is John Openshaw, but my own affairs have, asfar as I can understand, little to do with this awful business. It isa hereditary matter; so in order to give you an idea of the facts, Imust go back to the commencement of the affair.
"You must know that my grandfather had two sons--my uncle Elias andmy father Joseph. My father had a small factory at Coventry, which heenlarged at the time of the invention of bicycling. He was a patenteeof the Openshaw unbreakable tire, and his business met with suchsuccess that he was able to sell it and to retire upon a handsomecompetence.
"My uncle Elias emigrated to America when he was a young man andbecame a planter in Florida, where he was reported to have done verywell. At the time of the war he fought in Jackson's army, andafterwards under Hood, where he rose to be a colonel. When Lee laiddown his arms my uncle returned to his plantation, where he remainedfor three or four years. About 1869 or 1870 he came back to Europeand took a small estate in Sussex, near Horsham. He had made a veryconsiderable fortune in the States, and his reason for leaving themwas his aversion to the negroes, and his dislike of the Republicanpolicy in extending the franchise to them. He was a singular man,fierce and quick-tempered, very foul-mouthed when he was angry, andof a most retiring disposition. During all the years that he lived atHorsham, I doubt if ever he set foot in the town. He had a garden andtwo or three fields round his house, and there he would take hisexercise, though very often for weeks on end he would never leave hisroom. He drank a great deal of brandy and smoked very heavily, but hewould see no society and did not want any friends, not even his ownbrother.
"He didn't mind me; in fact, he took a fancy to me, for at the timewhen he saw me first I was a youngster of twelve or so. This would bein the year 1878, after he had been eight or nine years in England.He begged my father to let me live with him and he was very kind tome in his way. When he was sober he used to be fond of playingbackgammon and draughts with me, and he would make me hisrepresentative both with the servants and with the tradespeople, sothat by the time that I was sixteen I was quite master of the house.I kept all the keys and could go where I liked and do what I liked,so long as I did not disturb him in his privacy. There was onesingular exception, however, for he had a single room, a lumber-roomup among the attics, which was invariably locked, and which he wouldnever permit either me or anyone else to enter. With a boy'scuriosity I have peeped through the keyhole, but I was never able tosee more than such a collection of old trunks and bundles as would beexpected in such a room.
"One day--it was in March, 1883--a letter with a foreign stamp layupon the table in front of the colonel's plate. It was not a commonthing for him to receive letters, for his bills were all paid inready money, and he had no friends of any sort. 'From India!' said heas he took it up, 'Pondicherry postmark! What can this be?' Openingit hurriedly, out there jumped five little dried orange pips, whichpattered down upon his plate. I began to laugh at this, but the laughwas struck from my lips at the sight of his face. His lip had fallen,his eyes were protruding, his skin the colour of putty, and he glaredat the envelope which he still held in his trembling hand, 'K. K.K.!' he shrieked, and then, 'My God, my God, my sins have overtakenme!'
"'What is it, uncle?' I cried.
"'Death,' said he, and rising from the table he retired to his room,leaving me palpitating with horror. I took up the envelope and sawscrawled in red ink upon the inner flap, just above the gum, theletter K three times repeated. There was nothing else save the fivedried pips. What could be the reason of his overpowering terror? Ileft the breakfast-table, and as I ascended the stair I met himcoming down with an old rusty key, which must have belonged to theattic, in one hand, and a small brass box, like a cashbox, in theother.
"'They may do what they like, but I'll checkmate them still,' said hewith an oath. 'Tell Mary that I shall want a fire in my room to-day,and send down to Fordham, the Horsham lawyer.'
"I did as he ordered, and when the lawyer arrived I was asked to stepup to the room. The fire was burning brightly, and in the grate therewas a mass of black, fluffy ashes, as of burned paper, while thebrass box stood open and empty beside it. As I glanced at the box Inoticed, with a start, that upon the lid was printed the treble Kwhich I had read in the morning upon the envelope.
"'I wish you, John,' said my uncle, 'to witness my will. I leave myestate, with all its advantages and all its disadvantages, to mybrother, your father, whence it will, no doubt, descend to you. Ifyou can enjoy it in peace, well and good! If you find you cannot,take my advice, my boy, and leave it to your deadliest enemy. I amsorry to give you such a two-edged thing, but I can't say what turnthings are going to take. Kindly sign the paper where Mr. Fordhamshows you.'
"I signed the paper as directed, and the lawyer took it away withhim. The singular incident made, as you may think, the deepestimpression upon me, and I pondered over it and turned it every way inmy mind without being able to make anything of it. Yet I could notshake off the vague feeling of dread which it left behind, though thesensation grew less keen as the weeks passed and nothing happened todisturb the usual routine of our lives. I could see a change in myuncle, however. He drank more than ever, and he was less inclined forany sort of society. Most of his time he would spend in his room,with the door locked upon the inside, but sometimes he would emergein a sort of drunken frenzy and would burst out of the house and tearabout the garden with a revolver in his hand, screaming out that hewas afraid of no man, and that he was not to be cooped up, like asheep in a pen, by man or devil. When these hot fits were over,however, he would rush tumultuously in at the door and lock and barit behind him, like a man who can brazen it out no longer against theterror which lies at the roots of his soul. At such times I have seenhis face, even on a cold day, glisten with moisture, as though itwere new raised from a basin.
"Well, to come to an end of the matter, Mr. Holmes, and not to abuseyour patience, there came a night when he made one of those drunkensallies from which he never came back. We found him, when we went tosearch for him, face downward in a little green-scummed pool, whichlay at the foot of the garden. There was no sign of any violence, andthe water was but two feet deep, so that the jury, having regard tohis known eccentricity, brought in a verdict of 'suicide.' But I, whoknew how he winced from the very thought of death, had much ado topersuade myself that he had gone out of his way to meet it. Thematter passed, however, and my father entered into possession of theestate, and of some 14,000, which lay to his credit at the bank."
"One moment," Holmes interposed, "your statement is, I foresee, oneof the most remarkable to which I have ever listened. Let me have thedate of the reception by your uncle of the letter, and the date ofhis supposed suicide."
"The letter arrived on March 10, 1883. His death was seven weekslater, upon the night of May 2nd."
"Thank you. Pray proceed."
"When my father took over the Horsham property, he, at my request,made a careful examination of the attic, which had been always lockedup. We found the brass box there, although its contents had beendestroyed. On the inside of the cover was a paper label, with theinitials of K. K. K. repeated upon it, and 'Letters, memoranda,receipts, and a register' written beneath. These, we presume,indicated the nature of the papers which had been destroyed byColonel Openshaw. For the rest, there was nothing of much importancein the attic save a great many scattered papers and note-booksbearing upon my uncle's life in America. Some of them were of the wartime and showed that he had done his duty well and had borne therepute of a brave soldier. Others were of a date during thereconstruction of the Southern states, and were mostly concerned withpolitics, for he had evidently taken a strong part in opposing thecarpet-bag politicians who had been sent down from the North.
"Well, it was the beginning of '84 when my father came to live atHorsham, and all went as well as possible with us until the Januaryof '85. On the fourth day after the new year I heard my father give asharp cry of surprise as we sat together at the breakfast-table.There he was, sitting with a newly opened envelope in one hand andfive dried orange pips in the outstretched palm of the other one. Hehad always laughed at what he called my cock-and-bull story about thecolonel, but he looked very scared and puzzled now that the samething had come upon himself.
"'Why, what on earth does this mean, John?' he stammered.
"My heart had turned to lead. 'It is K. K. K.,' said I.
"He looked inside the envelope. 'So it is,' he cried. 'Here are thevery letters. But what is this written above them?'
"'Put the papers on the sundial,' I read, peeping over his shoulder.
"'What papers? What sundial?' he asked.
"'The sundial in the garden. There is no other,' said I; 'but thepapers must be those that are destroyed.'
"'Pooh!' said he, gripping hard at his courage. 'We are in acivilised land here, and we can't have tomfoolery of this kind. Wheredoes the thing come from?'
"'From Dundee,' I answered, glancing at the postmark.
"'Some preposterous practical joke,' said he. 'What have I to do withsundials and papers? I shall take no notice of such nonsense.'
"'I should certainly speak to the police,' I said.
"'And be laughed at for my pains. Nothing of the sort.'
"'Then let me do so?'
"'No, I forbid you. I won't have a fuss made about such nonsense.'
"It was in vain to argue with him, for he was a very obstinate man. Iwent about, however, with a heart which was full of forebodings.
"On the third day after the coming of the letter my father went fromhome to visit an old friend of his, Major Freebody, who is in commandof one of the forts upon Portsdown Hill. I was glad that he shouldgo, for it seemed to me that he was farther from danger when he wasaway from home. In that, however, I was in error. Upon the second dayof his absence I received a telegram from the major, imploring me tocome at once. My father had fallen over one of the deep chalk-pitswhich abound in the neighbourhood, and was lying senseless, with ashattered skull. I hurried to him, but he passed away without havingever recovered his consciousness. He had, as it appears, beenreturning from Fareham in the twilight, and as the country wasunknown to him, and the chalk-pit unfenced, the jury had nohesitation in bringing in a verdict of 'death from accidentalcauses.' Carefully as I examined every fact connected with his death,I was unable to find anything which could suggest the idea of murder.There were no signs of violence, no footmarks, no robbery, no recordof strangers having been seen upon the roads. And yet I need not tellyou that my mind was far from at ease, and that I was well-nighcertain that some foul plot had been woven round him.
"In this sinister way I came into my inheritance. You will ask me whyI did not dispose of it? I answer, because I was well convinced thatour troubles were in some way dependent upon an incident in myuncle's life, and that the danger would be as pressing in one houseas in another.
"It was in January, '85, that my poor father met his end, and twoyears and eight months have elapsed since then. During that time Ihave lived happily at Horsham, and I had begun to hope that thiscurse had passed away from the family, and that it had ended with thelast generation. I had begun to take comfort too soon, however;yesterday morning the blow fell in the very shape in which it hadcome upon my father."
The young man took from his waistcoat a crumpled envelope, andturning to the table he shook out upon it five little dried orangepips.
"This is the envelope," he continued. "The postmark isLondon--eastern division. Within are the very words which were uponmy father's last message: 'K. K. K.'; and then 'Put the papers on thesundial.'"
"What have you done?" asked Holmes.
"Nothing."
"Nothing?"
"To tell the truth"--he sank his face into his thin, white hands--"Ihave felt helpless. I have felt like one of those poor rabbits whenthe snake is writhing towards it. I seem to be in the grasp of someresistless, inexorable evil, which no foresight and no precautionscan guard against."
"Tut! tut!" cried Sherlock Holmes. "You must act, man, or you arelost. Nothing but energy can save you. This is no time for despair."
"I have seen the police."
"Ah!"
"But they listened to my story with a smile. I am convinced that theinspector has formed the opinion that the letters are all practicaljokes, and that the deaths of my relations were really accidents, asthe jury stated, and were not to be connected with the warnings."
Holmes shook his clenched hands in the air. "Incredible imbecility!"he cried.
"They have, however, allowed me a policeman, who may remain in thehouse with me."
"Has he come with you to-night?"
"No. His orders were to stay in the house."
Again Holmes raved in the air.
"Why did you come to me," he cried, "and, above all, why did you notcome at once?"
"I did not know. It was only to-day that I spoke to Major Prendergastabout my troubles and was advised by him to come to you."
"It is really two days since you had the letter. We should have actedbefore this. You have no further evidence, I suppose, than that whichyou have placed before us--no suggestive detail which might help us?"
"There is one thing," said John Openshaw. He rummaged in his coatpocket, and, drawing out a piece of discoloured, blue-tinted paper,he laid it out upon the table. "I have some remembrance," said he,"that on the day when my uncle burned the papers I observed that thesmall, unburned margins which lay amid the ashes were of thisparticular colour. I found this single sheet upon the floor of hisroom, and I am inclined to think that it may be one of the paperswhich has, perhaps, fluttered out from among the others, and in thatway has escaped destruction. Beyond the mention of pips, I do not seethat it helps us much. I think myself that it is a page from someprivate diary. The writing is undoubtedly my uncle's."
Holmes moved the lamp, and we both bent over the sheet of paper,which showed by its ragged edge that it had indeed been torn from abook. It was headed, "March, 1869," and beneath were the followingenigmatical notices:

4th. Hudson came. Same old platform.7th. Set the pips on McCauley, Paramore, and John Swain, of St.Augustine.9th. McCauley cleared.10th. John Swain cleared.12th. Visited Paramore. All well.
"Thank you!" said Holmes, folding up the paper and returning it toour visitor. "And now you must on no account lose another instant. Wecannot spare time even to discuss what you have told me. You must gethome instantly and act."
"What shall I do?"
"There is but one thing to do. It must be done at once. You must putthis piece of paper which you have shown us into the brass box whichyou have described. You must also put in a note to say that all theother papers were burned by your uncle, and that this is the only onewhich remains. You must assert that in such words as will carryconviction with them. Having done this, you must at once put the boxout upon the sundial, as directed. Do you understand?"
"Entirely."
"Do not think of revenge, or anything of the sort, at present. Ithink that we may gain that by means of the law; but we have our webto weave, while theirs is already woven. The first consideration isto remove the pressing danger which threatens you. The second is toclear up the mystery and to punish the guilty parties."
"I thank you," said the young man, rising and pulling on hisovercoat. "You have given me fresh life and hope. I shall certainlydo as you advise."
"Do not lose an instant. And, above all, take care of yourself in themeanwhile, for I do not think that there can be a doubt that you arethreatened by a very real and imminent danger. How do you go back?"
"By train from Waterloo."
"It is not yet nine. The streets will be crowded, so I trust that youmay be in safety. And yet you cannot guard yourself too closely."
"I am armed."
"That is well. To-morrow I shall set to work upon your case."
"I shall see you at Horsham, then?"
"No, your secret lies in London. It is there that I shall seek it."
"Then I shall call upon you in a day, or in two days, with news as tothe box and the papers. I shall take your advice in everyparticular." He shook hands with us and took his leave. Outside thewind still screamed and the rain splashed and pattered against thewindows. This strange, wild story seemed to have come to us from amidthe mad elements--blown in upon us like a sheet of sea-weed in agale--and now to have been reabsorbed by them once more.
Sherlock Holmes sat for some time in silence, with his head sunkforward and his eyes bent upon the red glow of the fire. Then he lithis pipe, and leaning back in his chair he watched the bluesmoke-rings as they chased each other up to the ceiling.
"I think, Watson," he remarked at last, "that of all our cases wehave had none more fantastic than this."
"Save, perhaps, the Sign of Four."
"Well, yes. Save, perhaps, that. And yet this John Openshaw seems tome to be walking amid even greater perils than did the Sholtos."
"But have you," I asked, "formed any definite conception as to whatthese perils are?"
"There can be no question as to their nature," he answered.
"Then what are they? Who is this K. K. K., and why does he pursuethis unhappy family?"
Sherlock Holmes closed his eyes and placed his elbows upon the armsof his chair, with his finger-tips together. "The ideal reasoner," heremarked, "would, when he had once been shown a single fact in allits bearings, deduce from it not only all the chain of events whichled up to it but also all the results which would follow from it. AsCuvier could correctly describe a whole animal by the contemplationof a single bone, so the observer who has thoroughly understood onelink in a series of incidents should be able to accurately state allthe other ones, both before and after. We have not yet grasped theresults which the reason alone can attain to. Problems may be solvedin the study which have baffled all those who have sought a solutionby the aid of their senses. To carry the art, however, to its highestpitch, it is necessary that the reasoner should be able to utiliseall the facts which have come to his knowledge; and this in itselfimplies, as you will readily see, a possession of all knowledge,which, even in these days of free education and encyclopaedias, is asomewhat rare accomplishment. It is not so impossible, however, thata man should possess all knowledge which is likely to be useful tohim in his work, and this I have endeavoured in my case to do. If Iremember rightly, you on one occasion, in the early days of ourfriendship, defined my limits in a very precise fashion."
"Yes," I answered, laughing. "It was a singular document. Philosophy,astronomy, and politics were marked at zero, I remember. Botanyvariable, geology profound as regards the mud-stains from any regionwithin fifty miles of town, chemistry eccentric, anatomyunsystematic, sensational literature and crime records unique,violin-player, boxer, swordsman, lawyer, and self-poisoner by cocaineand tobacco. Those, I think, were the main points of my analysis."
Holmes grinned at the last item. "Well," he said, "I say now, as Isaid then, that a man should keep his little brain-attic stocked withall the furniture that he is likely to use, and the rest he can putaway in the lumber-room of his library, where he can get it if hewants it. Now, for such a case as the one which has been submitted tous to-night, we need certainly to muster all our resources. Kindlyhand me down the letter K of the 'American Encyclopaedia' whichstands upon the shelf beside you. Thank you. Now let us consider thesituation and see what may be deduced from it. In the first place, wemay start with a strong presumption that Colonel Openshaw had somevery strong reason for leaving America. Men at his time of life donot change all their habits and exchange willingly the charmingclimate of Florida for the lonely life of an English provincial town.His extreme love of solitude in England suggests the idea that he wasin fear of someone or something, so we may assume as a workinghypothesis that it was fear of someone or something which drove himfrom America. As to what it was he feared, we can only deduce that byconsidering the formidable letters which were received by himself andhis successors. Did you remark the postmarks of those letters?"
"The first was from Pondicherry, the second from Dundee, and thethird from London."
"From East London. What do you deduce from that?"
"They are all seaports. That the writer was on board of a ship."
"Excellent. We have already a clue. There can be no doubt that theprobability--the strong probability--is that the writer was on boardof a ship. And now let us consider another point. In the case ofPondicherry, seven weeks elapsed between the threat and itsfulfilment, in Dundee it was only some three or four days. Does thatsuggest anything?"
"A greater distance to travel."
"But the letter had also a greater distance to come."
"Then I do not see the point."
"There is at least a presumption that the vessel in which the man ormen are is a sailing-ship. It looks as if they always send theirsingular warning or token before them when starting upon theirmission. You see how quickly the deed followed the sign when it camefrom Dundee. If they had come from Pondicherry in a steamer theywould have arrived almost as soon as their letter. But, as a matterof fact, seven weeks elapsed. I think that those seven weeksrepresented the difference between the mail-boat which brought theletter and the sailing vessel which brought the writer."
"It is possible."
"More than that. It is probable. And now you see the deadly urgencyof this new case, and why I urged young Openshaw to caution. The blowhas always fallen at the end of the time which it would take thesenders to travel the distance. But this one comes from London, andtherefore we cannot count upon delay."
"Good God!" I cried. "What can it mean, this relentless persecution?"
"The papers which Openshaw carried are obviously of vital importanceto the person or persons in the sailing-ship. I think that it isquite clear that there must be more than one of them. A single mancould not have carried out two deaths in such a way as to deceive acoroner's jury. There must have been several in it, and they musthave been men of resource and determination. Their papers they meanto have, be the holder of them who it may. In this way you see K. K.K. ceases to be the initials of an individual and becomes the badgeof a society."
"But of what society?"
"Have you never--" said Sherlock Holmes, bending forward and sinkinghis voice--"have you never heard of the Ku Klux Klan?"
"I never have."
Holmes turned over the leaves of the book upon his knee. "Here itis," said he presently:
"'Ku Klux Klan. A name derived from the fanciful resemblance to thesound produced by cocking a rifle. This terrible secret society wasformed by some ex-Confederate soldiers in the Southern states afterthe Civil War, and it rapidly formed local branches in differentparts of the country, notably in Tennessee, Louisiana, the Carolinas,Georgia, and Florida. Its power was used for political purposes,principally for the terrorising of the negro voters and the murderingand driving from the country of those who were opposed to its views.Its outrages were usually preceded by a warning sent to the markedman in some fantastic but generally recognised shape--a sprig ofoak-leaves in some parts, melon seeds or orange pips in others. Onreceiving this the victim might either openly abjure his former ways,or might fly from the country. If he braved the matter out, deathwould unfailingly come upon him, and usually in some strange andunforeseen manner. So perfect was the organisation of the society,and so systematic its methods, that there is hardly a case uponrecord where any man succeeded in braving it with impunity, or inwhich any of its outrages were traced home to the perpetrators. Forsome years the organisation flourished in spite of the efforts of theUnited States government and of the better classes of the communityin the South. Eventually, in the year 1869, the movement rathersuddenly collapsed, although there have been sporadic outbreaks ofthe same sort since that date.'
"You will observe," said Holmes, laying down the volume, "that thesudden breaking up of the society was coincident with thedisappearance of Openshaw from America with their papers. It may wellhave been cause and effect. It is no wonder that he and his familyhave some of the more implacable spirits upon their track. You canunderstand that this register and diary may implicate some of thefirst men in the South, and that there may be many who will not sleepeasy at night until it is recovered."
"Then the page we have seen--"
"Is such as we might expect. It ran, if I remember right, 'sent thepips to A, B, and C'--that is, sent the society's warning to them.Then there are successive entries that A and B cleared, or left thecountry, and finally that C was visited, with, I fear, a sinisterresult for C. Well, I think, Doctor, that we may let some light intothis dark place, and I believe that the only chance young Openshawhas in the meantime is to do what I have told him. There is nothingmore to be said or to be done to-night, so hand me over my violin andlet us try to forget for half an hour the miserable weather and thestill more miserable ways of our fellow-men."
It had cleared in the morning, and the sun was shining with a subduedbrightness through the dim veil which hangs over the great city.Sherlock Holmes was already at breakfast when I came down.
"You will excuse me for not waiting for you," said he; "I have, Iforesee, a very busy day before me in looking into this case of youngOpenshaw's."
"What steps will you take?" I asked.
"It will very much depend upon the results of my first inquiries. Imay have to go down to Horsham, after all."
"You will not go there first?"
"No, I shall commence with the City. Just ring the bell and the maidwill bring up your coffee."
As I waited, I lifted the unopened newspaper from the table andglanced my eye over it. It rested upon a heading which sent a chillto my heart.
"Holmes," I cried, "you are too late."
"Ah!" said he, laying down his cup, "I feared as much. How was itdone?" He spoke calmly, but I could see that he was deeply moved.
"My eye caught the name of Openshaw, and the heading 'Tragedy NearWaterloo Bridge.' Here is the account:
"Between nine and ten last night Police-Constable Cook, of the HDivision, on duty near Waterloo Bridge, heard a cry for help and asplash in the water. The night, however, was extremely dark andstormy, so that, in spite of the help of several passers-by, it wasquite impossible to effect a rescue. The alarm, however, was given,and, by the aid of the water-police, the body was eventuallyrecovered. It proved to be that of a young gentleman whose name, asit appears from an envelope which was found in his pocket, was JohnOpenshaw, and whose residence is near Horsham. It is conjectured thathe may have been hurrying down to catch the last train from WaterlooStation, and that in his haste and the extreme darkness he missed hispath and walked over the edge of one of the small landing-places forriver steamboats. The body exhibited no traces of violence, and therecan be no doubt that the deceased had been the victim of anunfortunate accident, which should have the effect of calling theattention of the authorities to the condition of the riversidelanding-stages."
We sat in silence for some minutes, Holmes more depressed and shakenthan I had ever seen him.
"That hurts my pride, Watson," he said at last. "It is a pettyfeeling, no doubt, but it hurts my pride. It becomes a personalmatter with me now, and, if God sends me health, I shall set my handupon this gang. That he should come to me for help, and that I shouldsend him away to his death--!" He sprang from his chair and pacedabout the room in uncontrollable agitation, with a flush upon hissallow cheeks and a nervous clasping and unclasping of his long thinhands.
"They must be cunning devils," he exclaimed at last. "How could theyhave decoyed him down there? The Embankment is not on the direct lineto the station. The bridge, no doubt, was too crowded, even on such anight, for their purpose. Well, Watson, we shall see who will win inthe long run. I am going out now!"
"To the police?"
"No; I shall be my own police. When I have spun the web they may takethe flies, but not before."
All day I was engaged in my professional work, and it was late in theevening before I returned to Baker Street. Sherlock Holmes had notcome back yet. It was nearly ten o'clock before he entered, lookingpale and worn. He walked up to the sideboard, and tearing a piecefrom the loaf he devoured it voraciously, washing it down with a longdraught of water.
"You are hungry," I remarked.
"Starving. It had escaped my memory. I have had nothing sincebreakfast."
"Nothing?"
"Not a bite. I had no time to think of it."
"And how have you succeeded?"
"Well."
"You have a clue?"
"I have them in the hollow of my hand. Young Openshaw shall not longremain unavenged. Why, Watson, let us put their own devilishtrade-mark upon them. It is well thought of!"
"What do you mean?"
He took an orange from the cupboard, and tearing it to pieces hesqueezed out the pips upon the table. Of these he took five andthrust them into an envelope. On the inside of the flap he wrote "S.H. for J. O." Then he sealed it and addressed it to "Captain JamesCalhoun, Barque Lone Star, Savannah, Georgia."
"That will await him when he enters port," said he, chuckling. "Itmay give him a sleepless night. He will find it as sure a precursorof his fate as Openshaw did before him."
"And who is this Captain Calhoun?"
"The leader of the gang. I shall have the others, but he first."
"How did you trace it, then?"
He took a large sheet of paper from his pocket, all covered withdates and names.
"I have spent the whole day," said he, "over Lloyd's registers andfiles of the old papers, following the future career of every vesselwhich touched at Pondicherry in January and February in '83. Therewere thirty-six ships of fair tonnage which were reported thereduring those months. Of these, one, the Lone Star, instantlyattracted my attention, since, although it was reported as havingcleared from London, the name is that which is given to one of thestates of the Union."
"Texas, I think."
"I was not and am not sure which; but I knew that the ship must havean American origin."
"What then?"
"I searched the Dundee records, and when I found that the barque LoneStar was there in January, '85, my suspicion became a certainty. Ithen inquired as to the vessels which lay at present in the port ofLondon."
"Yes?"
"The Lone Star had arrived here last week. I went down to the AlbertDock and found that she had been taken down the river by the earlytide this morning, homeward bound to Savannah. I wired to Gravesendand learned that she had passed some time ago, and as the wind iseasterly I have no doubt that she is now past the Goodwins and notvery far from the Isle of Wight."
"What will you do, then?"
"Oh, I have my hand upon him. He and the two mates, are as I learn,the only native-born Americans in the ship. The others are Finns andGermans. I know, also, that they were all three away from the shiplast night. I had it from the stevedore who has been loading theircargo. By the time that their sailing-ship reaches Savannah themail-boat will have carried this letter, and the cable will haveinformed the police of Savannah that these three gentlemen are badlywanted here upon a charge of murder."
There is ever a flaw, however, in the best laid of human plans, andthe murderers of John Openshaw were never to receive the orange pipswhich would show them that another, as cunning and as resolute asthemselves, was upon their track. Very long and very severe were theequinoctial gales that year. We waited long for news of the Lone Starof Savannah, but none ever reached us. We did at last hear thatsomewhere far out in the Atlantic a shattered stern-post of a boatwas seen swinging in the trough of a wave, with the letters "L. S."carved upon it, and that is all which we shall ever know of the fateof the Lone Star.





                     THE MAN WITH THE TWISTED LIP
Isa Whitney, brother of the late Elias Whitney, D.D., Principal ofthe Theological College of St. George's, was much addicted to opium.The habit grew upon him, as I understand, from some foolish freakwhen he was at college; for having read De Quincey's description ofhis dreams and sensations, he had drenched his tobacco with laudanumin an attempt to produce the same effects. He found, as so many morehave done, that the practice is easier to attain than to get rid of,and for many years he continued to be a slave to the drug, an objectof mingled horror and pity to his friends and relatives. I can seehim now, with yellow, pasty face, drooping lids, and pin-pointpupils, all huddled in a chair, the wreck and ruin of a noble man.
One night--it was in June, '89--there came a ring to my bell, aboutthe hour when a man gives his first yawn and glances at the clock. Isat up in my chair, and my wife laid her needle-work down in her lapand made a little face of disappointment.
"A patient!" said she. "You'll have to go out."
I groaned, for I was newly come back from a weary day.
We heard the door open, a few hurried words, and then quick stepsupon the linoleum. Our own door flew open, and a lady, clad in somedark-coloured stuff, with a black veil, entered the room.
"You will excuse my calling so late," she began, and then, suddenlylosing her self-control, she ran forward, threw her arms about mywife's neck, and sobbed upon her shoulder. "Oh, I'm in such trouble!"she cried; "I do so want a little help."
"Why," said my wife, pulling up her veil, "it is Kate Whitney.  Howyou startled me, Kate! I had not an idea who you were when you camein."
"I didn't know what to do, so I came straight to you." That wasalways the way. Folk who were in grief came to my wife like birds toa light-house.
"It was very sweet of you to come. Now, you must have some wine andwater, and sit here comfortably and tell us all about it. Or shouldyou rather that I sent James off to bed?"
"Oh, no, no! I want the doctor's advice and help, too. It's aboutIsa. He has not been home for two days. I am so frightened abouthim!"
It was not the first time that she had spoken to us of her husband'strouble, to me as a doctor, to my wife as an old friend and schoolcompanion. We soothed and comforted her by such words as we couldfind. Did she know where her husband was? Was it possible that wecould bring him back to her?
It seems that it was. She had the surest information that of late hehad, when the fit was on him, made use of an opium den in thefarthest east of the City. Hitherto his orgies had always beenconfined to one day, and he had come back, twitching and shattered,in the evening. But now the spell had been upon him eight-and-fortyhours, and he lay there, doubtless among the dregs of the docks,breathing in the poison or sleeping off the effects. There he was tobe found, she was sure of it, at the Bar of Gold, in Upper SwandamLane. But what was she to do? How could she, a young and timid woman,make her way into such a place and pluck her husband out from amongthe ruffians who surrounded him?
There was the case, and of course there was but one way out of it.Might I not escort her to this place? And then, as a second thought,why should she come at all? I was Isa Whitney's medical adviser, andas such I had influence over him. I could manage it better if I werealone. I promised her on my word that I would send him home in a cabwithin two hours if he were indeed at the address which she had givenme. And so in ten minutes I had left my armchair and cheerysitting-room behind me, and was speeding eastward in a hansom on astrange errand, as it seemed to me at the time, though the futureonly could show how strange it was to be.
But there was no great difficulty in the first stage of my adventure.Upper Swandam Lane is a vile alley lurking behind the high wharveswhich line the north side of the river to the east of London Bridge.Between a slop-shop and a gin-shop, approached by a steep flight ofsteps leading down to a black gap like the mouth of a cave, I foundthe den of which I was in search. Ordering my cab to wait, I passeddown the steps, worn hollow in the centre by the ceaseless tread ofdrunken feet; and by the light of a flickering oil-lamp above thedoor I found the latch and made my way into a long, low room, thickand heavy with the brown opium smoke, and terraced with woodenberths, like the forecastle of an emigrant ship.
Through the gloom one could dimly catch a glimpse of bodies lying instrange fantastic poses, bowed shoulders, bent knees, heads thrownback, and chins pointing upward, with here and there a dark,lack-lustre eye turned upon the newcomer. Out of the black shadowsthere glimmered little red circles of light, now bright, now faint,as the burning poison waxed or waned in the bowls of the metal pipes.The most lay silent, but some muttered to themselves, and otherstalked together in a strange, low, monotonous voice, theirconversation coming in gushes, and then suddenly tailing off intosilence, each mumbling out his own thoughts and paying little heed tothe words of his neighbour. At the farther end was a small brazier ofburning charcoal, beside which on a three-legged wooden stool theresat a tall, thin old man, with his jaw resting upon his two fists,and his elbows upon his knees, staring into the fire.
As I entered, a sallow Malay attendant had hurried up with a pipe forme and a supply of the drug, beckoning me to an empty berth.
"Thank you. I have not come to stay," said I. "There is a friend ofmine here, Mr. Isa Whitney, and I wish to speak with him."
There was a movement and an exclamation from my right, and peeringthrough the gloom, I saw Whitney, pale, haggard, and unkempt, staringout at me.
"My God! It's Watson," said he. He was in a pitiable state ofreaction, with every nerve in a twitter. "I say, Watson, what o'clockis it?"
"Nearly eleven."
"Of what day?"
"Of Friday, June 19th."
"Good heavens! I thought it was Wednesday. It is Wednesday. Whatd'you want to frighten a chap for?" He sank his face onto his armsand began to sob in a high treble key.
"I tell you that it is Friday, man. Your wife has been waiting thistwo days for you. You should be ashamed of yourself!"
"So I am. But you've got mixed, Watson, for I have only been here afew hours, three pipes, four pipes--I forget how many. But I'll gohome with you. I wouldn't frighten Kate--poor little Kate. Give meyour hand! Have you a cab?"
"Yes, I have one waiting."
"Then I shall go in it. But I must owe something. Find what I owe,Watson. I am all off colour. I can do nothing for myself."
I walked down the narrow passage between the double row of sleepers,holding my breath to keep out the vile, stupefying fumes of the drug,and looking about for the manager. As I passed the tall man who satby the brazier I felt a sudden pluck at my skirt, and a low voicewhispered, "Walk past me, and then look back at me." The words fellquite distinctly upon my ear. I glanced down. They could only havecome from the old man at my side, and yet he sat now as absorbed asever, very thin, very wrinkled, bent with age, an opium pipe danglingdown from between his knees, as though it had dropped in sheerlassitude from his fingers. I took two steps forward and looked back.It took all my self-control to prevent me from breaking out into acry of astonishment. He had turned his back so that none could seehim but I. His form had filled out, his wrinkles were gone, the dulleyes had regained their fire, and there, sitting by the fire andgrinning at my surprise, was none other than Sherlock Holmes. He madea slight motion to me to approach him, and instantly, as he turnedhis face half round to the company once more, subsided into adoddering, loose-lipped senility.
"Holmes!" I whispered, "what on earth are you doing in this den?"
"As low as you can," he answered; "I have excellent ears. If youwould have the great kindness to get rid of that sottish friend ofyours I should be exceedingly glad to have a little talk with you."
"I have a cab outside."
"Then pray send him home in it. You may safely trust him, for heappears to be too limp to get into any mischief. I should recommendyou also to send a note by the cabman to your wife to say that youhave thrown in your lot with me. If you will wait outside, I shall bewith you in five minutes."
      It was difficult to refuse any of Sherlock Holmes' requests,for they were always so exceedingly definite, and put forward withsuch a quiet air of mastery. I felt, however, that when Whitney wasonce confined in the cab my mission was practically accomplished; andfor the rest, I could not wish anything better than to be associatedwith my friend in one of those singular adventures which were thenormal condition of his existence. In a few minutes I had written mynote, paid Whitney's bill, led him out to the cab, and seen himdriven through the darkness. In a very short time a decrepit figurehad emerged from the opium den, and I was walking down the streetwith Sherlock Holmes. For two streets he shuffled along with a bentback and an uncertain foot. Then, glancing quickly round, hestraightened himself out and burst into a hearty fit of laughter.
"I suppose, Watson," said he, "that you imagine that I have addedopium-smoking to cocaine injections, and all the other littleweaknesses on which you have favoured me with your medical views."
"I was certainly surprised to find you there."
"But not more so than I to find you."
"I came to find a friend."
"And I to find an enemy."
"An enemy?"
"Yes; one of my natural enemies, or, shall I say, my natural prey.Briefly, Watson, I am in the midst of a very remarkable inquiry, andI have hoped to find a clue in the incoherent ramblings of thesesots, as I have done before now. Had I been recognised in that den mylife would not have been worth an hour's purchase; for I have used itbefore now for my own purposes, and the rascally Lascar who runs ithas sworn to have vengeance upon me. There is a trap-door at the backof that building, near the corner of Paul's Wharf, which could tellsome strange tales of what has passed through it upon the moonlessnights."
"What! You do not mean bodies?"
"Ay, bodies, Watson. We should be rich men if we had 1000 for everypoor devil who has been done to death in that den. It is the vilestmurder-trap on the whole riverside, and I fear that Neville St. Clairhas entered it never to leave it more. But our trap should be here."He put his two forefingers between his teeth and whistled shrilly--asignal which was answered by a similar whistle from the distance,followed shortly by the rattle of wheels and the clink of horses'hoofs.
"Now, Watson," said Holmes, as a tall dog-cart dashed up through thegloom, throwing out two golden tunnels of yellow light from its sidelanterns. "You'll come with me, won't you?"
"If I can be of use."
"Oh, a trusty comrade is always of use; and a chronicler still moreso. My room at The Cedars is a double-bedded one."
"The Cedars?"
"Yes; that is Mr. St. Clair's house. I am staying there while Iconduct the inquiry."
"Where is it, then?"
"Near Lee, in Kent. We have a seven-mile drive before us."
"But I am all in the dark."
"Of course you are. You'll know all about it presently. Jump up here.All right, John; we shall not need you. Here's half a crown. Look outfor me to-morrow, about eleven. Give her her head. So long, then!"
He flicked the horse with his whip, and we dashed away through theendless succession of sombre and deserted streets, which widenedgradually, until we were flying across a broad balustraded bridge,with the murky river flowing sluggishly beneath us. Beyond layanother dull wilderness of bricks and mortar, its silence broken onlyby the heavy, regular footfall of the policeman, or the songs andshouts of some belated party of revellers. A dull wrack was driftingslowly across the sky, and a star or two twinkled dimly here andthere through the rifts of the clouds. Holmes drove in silence, withhis head sunk upon his breast, and the air of a man who is lost inthought, while I sat beside him, curious to learn what this new questmight be which seemed to tax his powers so sorely, and yet afraid tobreak in upon the current of his thoughts. We had driven severalmiles, and were beginning to get to the fringe of the belt ofsuburban villas, when he shook himself, shrugged his shoulders, andlit up his pipe with the air of a man who has satisfied himself thathe is acting for the best.
"You have a grand gift of silence, Watson," said he. "It makes youquite invaluable as a companion. 'Pon my word, it is a great thingfor me to have someone to talk to, for my own thoughts are notover-pleasant. I was wondering what I should say to this dear littlewoman to-night when she meets me at the door."
"You forget that I know nothing about it."
"I shall just have time to tell you the facts of the case before weget to Lee. It seems absurdly simple, and yet, somehow I can getnothing to go upon. There's plenty of thread, no doubt, but I can'tget the end of it into my hand. Now, I'll state the case clearly andconcisely to you, Watson, and maybe you can see a spark where all isdark to me."
"Proceed, then."
"Some years ago--to be definite, in May, 1884--there came to Lee agentleman, Neville St. Clair by name, who appeared to have plenty ofmoney. He took a large villa, laid out the grounds very nicely, andlived generally in good style. By degrees he made friends in theneighbourhood, and in 1887 he married the daughter of a local brewer,by whom he now has two children. He had no occupation, but wasinterested in several companies and went into town as a rule in themorning, returning by the 5.14 from Cannon Street every night. Mr.St. Clair is now thirty-seven years of age, is a man of temperatehabits, a good husband, a very affectionate father, and a man who ispopular with all who know him. I may add that his whole debts at thepresent moment, as far as we have been able to ascertain, amount to88 10s., while he has 220 standing to his credit in the Capital andCounties Bank. There is no reason, therefore, to think that moneytroubles have been weighing upon his mind.
"Last Monday Mr. Neville St. Clair went into town rather earlier thanusual, remarking before he started that he had two importantcommissions to perform, and that he would bring his little boy home abox of bricks. Now, by the merest chance, his wife received atelegram upon this same Monday, very shortly after his departure, tothe effect that a small parcel of considerable value which she hadbeen expecting was waiting for her at the offices of the AberdeenShipping Company. Now, if you are well up in your London, you willknow that the office of the company is in Fresno Street, whichbranches out of Upper Swandam Lane, where you found me to-night. Mrs.St. Clair had her lunch, started for the City, did some shopping,proceeded to the company's office, got her packet, and found herselfat exactly 4.35 walking through Swandam Lane on her way back to thestation. Have you followed me so far?"
"It is very clear."
"If you remember, Monday was an exceedingly hot day, and Mrs. St.Clair walked slowly, glancing about in the hope of seeing a cab, asshe did not like the neighbourhood in which she found herself. Whileshe was walking in this way down Swandam Lane, she suddenly heard anejaculation or cry, and was struck cold to see her husband lookingdown at her and, as it seemed to her, beckoning to her from asecond-floor window. The window was open, and she distinctly saw hisface, which she describes as being terribly agitated. He waved hishands frantically to her, and then vanished from the window sosuddenly that it seemed to her that he had been plucked back by someirresistible force from behind. One singular point which struck herquick feminine eye was that although he wore some dark coat, such ashe had started to town in, he had on neither collar nor necktie.
"Convinced that something was amiss with him, she rushed down thesteps--for the house was none other than the opium den in which youfound me to-night--and running through the front room she attemptedto ascend the stairs which led to the first floor. At the foot of thestairs, however, she met this Lascar scoundrel of whom I have spoken,who thrust her back and, aided by a Dane, who acts as assistantthere, pushed her out into the street. Filled with the most maddeningdoubts and fears, she rushed down the lane and, by rare good-fortune,met in Fresno Street a number of constables with an inspector, all ontheir way to their beat. The inspector and two men accompanied herback, and in spite of the continued resistance of the proprietor,they made their way to the room in which Mr. St. Clair had last beenseen. There was no sign of him there. In fact, in the whole of thatfloor there was no one to be found save a crippled wretch of hideousaspect, who, it seems, made his home there. Both he and the Lascarstoutly swore that no one else had been in the front room during theafternoon. So determined was their denial that the inspector wasstaggered, and had almost come to believe that Mrs. St. Clair hadbeen deluded when, with a cry, she sprang at a small deal box whichlay upon the table and tore the lid from it. Out there fell a cascadeof children's bricks. It was the toy which he had promised to bringhome.
"This discovery, and the evident confusion which the cripple showed,made the inspector realise that the matter was serious. The roomswere carefully examined, and results all pointed to an abominablecrime. The front room was plainly furnished as a sitting-room and ledinto a small bedroom, which looked out upon the back of one of thewharves. Between the wharf and the bedroom window is a narrow strip,which is dry at low tide but is covered at high tide with at leastfour and a half feet of water. The bedroom window was a broad one andopened from below. On examination traces of blood were to be seenupon the windowsill, and several scattered drops were visible uponthe wooden floor of the bedroom. Thrust away behind a curtain in thefront room were all the clothes of Mr. Neville St. Clair, with theexception of his coat. His boots, his socks, his hat, and hiswatch--all were there. There were no signs of violence upon any ofthese garments, and there were no other traces of Mr. Neville St.Clair. Out of the window he must apparently have gone for no otherexit could be discovered, and the ominous bloodstains upon the sillgave little promise that he could save himself by swimming, for thetide was at its very highest at the moment of the tragedy.
"And now as to the villains who seemed to be immediately implicatedin the matter. The Lascar was known to be a man of the vilestantecedents, but as, by Mrs. St. Clair's story, he was known to havebeen at the foot of the stair within a very few seconds of herhusband's appearance at the window, he could hardly have been morethan an accessory to the crime. His defence was one of absoluteignorance, and he protested that he had no knowledge as to the doingsof Hugh Boone, his lodger, and that he could not account in any wayfor the presence of the missing gentleman's clothes.
"So much for the Lascar manager. Now for the sinister cripple wholives upon the second floor of the opium den, and who was certainlythe last human being whose eyes rested upon Neville St. Clair. Hisname is Hugh Boone, and his hideous face is one which is familiar toevery man who goes much to the City. He is a professional beggar,though in order to avoid the police regulations he pretends to asmall trade in wax vestas. Some little distance down ThreadneedleStreet, upon the left-hand side, there is, as you may have remarked,a small angle in the wall. Here it is that this creature takes hisdaily seat, cross-legged with his tiny stock of matches on his lap,and as he is a piteous spectacle a small rain of charity descendsinto the greasy leather cap which lies upon the pavement beside him.I have watched the fellow more than once before ever I thought ofmaking his professional acquaintance, and I have been surprised atthe harvest which he has reaped in a short time. His appearance, yousee, is so remarkable that no one can pass him without observing him.A shock of orange hair, a pale face disfigured by a horrible scar,which, by its contraction, has turned up the outer edge of his upperlip, a bulldog chin, and a pair of very penetrating dark eyes, whichpresent a singular contrast to the colour of his hair, all mark himout from amid the common crowd of mendicants and so, too, does hiswit, for he is ever ready with a reply to any piece of chaff whichmay be thrown at him by the passers-by. This is the man whom we nowlearn to have been the lodger at the opium den, and to have been thelast man to see the gentleman of whom we are in quest."
"But a cripple!" said I. "What could he have done single-handedagainst a man in the prime of life?"
"He is a cripple in the sense that he walks with a limp; but in otherrespects he appears to be a powerful and well-nurtured man. Surelyyour medical experience would tell you, Watson, that weakness in onelimb is often compensated for by exceptional strength in the others."
"Pray continue your narrative."
"Mrs. St. Clair had fainted at the sight of the blood upon thewindow, and she was escorted home in a cab by the police, as herpresence could be of no help to them in their investigations.Inspector Barton, who had charge of the case, made a very carefulexamination of the premises, but without finding anything which threwany light upon the matter. One mistake had been made in not arrestingBoone instantly, as he was allowed some few minutes during which hemight have communicated with his friend the Lascar, but this faultwas soon remedied, and he was seized and searched, without anythingbeing found which could incriminate him. There were, it is true, someblood-stains upon his right shirt-sleeve, but he pointed to hisring-finger, which had been cut near the nail, and explained that thebleeding came from there, adding that he had been to the window notlong before, and that the stains which had been observed there camedoubtless from the same source. He denied strenuously having everseen Mr. Neville St. Clair and swore that the presence of the clothesin his room was as much a mystery to him as to the police. As to Mrs.St. Clair's assertion that she had actually seen her husband at thewindow, he declared that she must have been either mad or dreaming.He was removed, loudly protesting, to the police-station, while theinspector remained upon the premises in the hope that the ebbing tidemight afford some fresh clue.
"And it did, though they hardly found upon the mud-bank what they hadfeared to find. It was Neville St. Clair's coat, and not Neville St.Clair, which lay uncovered as the tide receded. And what do you thinkthey found in the pockets?"
"I cannot imagine."
"No, I don't think you would guess. Every pocket stuffed with penniesand half-pennies--421 pennies and 270 half-pennies. It was no wonderthat it had not been swept away by the tide. But a human body is adifferent matter. There is a fierce eddy between the wharf and thehouse. It seemed likely enough that the weighted coat had remainedwhen the stripped body had been sucked away into the river."
"But I understand that all the other clothes were found in the room.Would the body be dressed in a coat alone?"
"No, sir, but the facts might be met speciously enough. Suppose thatthis man Boone had thrust Neville St. Clair through the window, thereis no human eye which could have seen the deed. What would he dothen? It would of course instantly strike him that he must get rid ofthe tell-tale garments. He would seize the coat, then, and be in theact of throwing it out, when it would occur to him that it would swimand not sink. He has little time, for he has heard the scuffledownstairs when the wife tried to force her way up, and perhaps hehas already heard from his Lascar confederate that the police arehurrying up the street. There is not an instant to be lost. He rushesto some secret hoard, where he has accumulated the fruits of hisbeggary, and he stuffs all the coins upon which he can lay his handsinto the pockets to make sure of the coat's sinking. He throws itout, and would have done the same with the other garments had not heheard the rush of steps below, and only just had time to close thewindow when the police appeared."
"It certainly sounds feasible."
"Well, we will take it as a working hypothesis for want of a better.Boone, as I have told you, was arrested and taken to the station, butit could not be shown that there had ever before been anythingagainst him. He had for years been known as a professional beggar,but his life appeared to have been a very quiet and innocent one.There the matter stands at present, and the questions which have tobe solved--what Neville St. Clair was doing in the opium den, whathappened to him when there, where is he now, and what Hugh Boone hadto do with his disappearance--are all as far from a solution as ever.I confess that I cannot recall any case within my experience whichlooked at the first glance so simple and yet which presented suchdifficulties."
While Sherlock Holmes had been detailing this singular series ofevents, we had been whirling through the outskirts of the great townuntil the last straggling houses had been left behind, and we rattledalong with a country hedge upon either side of us. Just as hefinished, however, we drove through two scattered villages, where afew lights still glimmered in the windows.
"We are on the outskirts of Lee," said my companion. "We have touchedon three English counties in our short drive, starting in Middlesex,passing over an angle of Surrey, and ending in Kent. See that lightamong the trees? That is The Cedars, and beside that lamp sits awoman whose anxious ears have already, I have little doubt, caughtthe clink of our horse's feet."
"But why are you not conducting the case from Baker Street?" I asked.
"Because there are many inquiries which must be made out here. Mrs.St. Clair has most kindly put two rooms at my disposal, and you mayrest assured that she will have nothing but a welcome for my friendand colleague. I hate to meet her, Watson, when I have no news of herhusband. Here we are. Whoa, there, whoa!"
We had pulled up in front of a large villa which stood within its owngrounds. A stable-boy had run out to the horse's head, and springingdown, I followed Holmes up the small, winding gravel-drive which ledto the house. As we approached, the door flew open, and a littleblonde woman stood in the opening, clad in some sort of lightmousseline de soie, with a touch of fluffy pink chiffon at her neckand wrists. She stood with her figure outlined against the flood oflight, one hand upon the door, one half-raised in her eagerness, herbody slightly bent, her head and face protruded, with eager eyes andparted lips, a standing question.
"Well?" she cried, "well?" And then, seeing that there were two ofus, she gave a cry of hope which sank into a groan as she saw that mycompanion shook his head and shrugged his shoulders.
"No good news?"
"None."
"No bad?"
"No."
"Thank God for that. But come in. You must be weary, for you have hada long day."
"This is my friend, Dr. Watson. He has been of most vital use to mein several of my cases, and a lucky chance has made it possible forme to bring him out and associate him with this investigation."
"I am delighted to see you," said she, pressing my hand warmly. "Youwill, I am sure, forgive anything that may be wanting in ourarrangements, when you consider the blow which has come so suddenlyupon us."
"My dear madam," said I, "I am an old campaigner, and if I were not Ican very well see that no apology is needed. If I can be of anyassistance, either to you or to my friend here, I shall be indeedhappy."
"Now, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said the lady as we entered a well-litdining-room, upon the table of which a cold supper had been laid out,"I should very much like to ask you one or two plain questions, towhich I beg that you will give a plain answer."
"Certainly, madam."
"Do not trouble about my feelings. I am not hysterical, nor given tofainting. I simply wish to hear your real, real opinion."
"Upon what point?"
"In your heart of hearts, do you think that Neville is alive?"
Sherlock Holmes seemed to be embarrassed by the question. "Frankly,now!" she repeated, standing upon the rug and looking keenly down athim as he leaned back in a basket-chair.
"Frankly, then, madam, I do not."
"You think that he is dead?"
"I do."
"Murdered?"
"I don't say that. Perhaps."
"And on what day did he meet his death?"
"On Monday."
"Then perhaps, Mr. Holmes, you will be good enough to explain how itis that I have received a letter from him to-day."
Sherlock Holmes sprang out of his chair as if he had been galvanised.
"What!" he roared.
"Yes, to-day." She stood smiling, holding up a little slip of paperin the air.
"May I see it?"
"Certainly."
He snatched it from her in his eagerness, and smoothing it out uponthe table he drew over the lamp and examined it intently. I had leftmy chair and was gazing at it over his shoulder. The envelope was avery coarse one and was stamped with the Gravesend postmark and withthe date of that very day, or rather of the day before, for it wasconsiderably after midnight.
"Coarse writing," murmured Holmes. "Surely this is not your husband'swriting, madam."
"No, but the enclosure is."
"I perceive also that whoever addressed the envelope had to go andinquire as to the address."
"How can you tell that?"
"The name, you see, is in perfectly black ink, which has drieditself. The rest is of the greyish colour, which shows thatblotting-paper has been used. If it had been written straight off,and then blotted, none would be of a deep black shade. This man haswritten the name, and there has then been a pause before he wrote theaddress, which can only mean that he was not familiar with it. It is,of course, a trifle, but there is nothing so important as trifles.Let us now see the letter. Ha!  there has been an enclosure here!"
"Yes, there was a ring. His signet-ring."
"And you are sure that this is your husband's hand?"
"One of his hands."
"One?"
"His hand when he wrote hurriedly. It is very unlike his usualwriting, and yet I know it well."
"Dearest do not be frightened. All will come well. There is a hugeerror which it may take some little time to rectify. Wait inpatience."Neville.
Written in pencil upon the fly-leaf of a book, octavo size, nowater-mark. Hum! Posted to-day in Gravesend by a man with a dirtythumb. Ha! And the flap has been gummed, if I am not very much inerror, by a person who had been chewing tobacco. And you have nodoubt that it is your husband's hand, madam?"
"None. Neville wrote those words."
"And they were posted to-day at Gravesend. Well, Mrs. St. Clair, theclouds lighten, though I should not venture to say that the danger isover."
"But he must be alive, Mr. Holmes."
"Unless this is a clever forgery to put us on the wrong scent. Thering, after all, proves nothing. It may have been taken from him."
"No, no; it is, it is his very own writing!"
"Very well. It may, however, have been written on Monday and onlyposted to-day."
"That is possible."
"If so, much may have happened between."
"Oh, you must not discourage me, Mr. Holmes. I know that all is wellwith him. There is so keen a sympathy between us that I should knowif evil came upon him. On the very day that I saw him last he cuthimself in the bedroom, and yet I in the dining-room rushed upstairsinstantly with the utmost certainty that something had happened. Doyou think that I would respond to such a trifle and yet be ignorantof his death?"
"I have seen too much not to know that the impression of a woman maybe more valuable than the conclusion of an analytical reasoner. Andin this letter you certainly have a very strong piece of evidence tocorroborate your view. But if your husband is alive and able to writeletters, why should he remain away from you?"
"I cannot imagine. It is unthinkable."
"And on Monday he made no remarks before leaving you?"
"No."
"And you were surprised to see him in Swandam Lane?"
"Very much so."
"Was the window open?"
"Yes."
"Then he might have called to you?"
"He might."
"He only, as I understand, gave an inarticulate cry?"
"Yes."
"A call for help, you thought?"
"Yes. He waved his hands."
"But it might have been a cry of surprise. Astonishment at theunexpected sight of you might cause him to throw up his hands?"
"It is possible."
"And you thought he was pulled back?"
"He disappeared so suddenly."
"He might have leaped back. You did not see anyone else in the room?"
"No, but this horrible man confessed to having been there, and theLascar was at the foot of the stairs."
"Quite so. Your husband, as far as you could see, had his ordinaryclothes on?"
"But without his collar or tie. I distinctly saw his bare throat."
"Had he ever spoken of Swandam Lane?"
"Never."
"Had he ever showed any signs of having taken opium?"
"Never."
"Thank you, Mrs. St. Clair. Those are the principal points aboutwhich I wished to be absolutely clear. We shall now have a littlesupper and then retire, for we may have a very busy day to-morrow."
A large and comfortable double-bedded room had been placed at ourdisposal, and I was quickly between the sheets, for I was weary aftermy night of adventure. Sherlock Holmes was a man, however, who, whenhe had an unsolved problem upon his mind, would go for days, and evenfor a week, without rest, turning it over, rearranging his facts,looking at it from every point of view until he had either fathomedit or convinced himself that his data were insufficient. It was soonevident to me that he was now preparing for an all-night sitting. Hetook off his coat and waistcoat, put on a large blue dressing-gown,and then wandered about the room collecting pillows from his bed andcushions from the sofa and armchairs. With these he constructed asort of Eastern divan, upon which he perched himself cross-legged,with an ounce of shag tobacco and a box of matches laid out in frontof him. In the dim light of the lamp I saw him sitting there, an oldbriar pipe between his lips, his eyes fixed vacantly upon the cornerof the ceiling, the blue smoke curling up from him, silent,motionless, with the light shining upon his strong-set aquilinefeatures. So he sat as I dropped off to sleep, and so he sat when asudden ejaculation caused me to wake up, and I found the summer sunshining into the apartment. The pipe was still between his lips, thesmoke still curled upward, and the room was full of a dense tobaccohaze, but nothing remained of the heap of shag which I had seen uponthe previous night.
"Awake, Watson?" he asked.
"Yes."
"Game for a morning drive?"
"Certainly."
"Then dress. No one is stirring yet, but I know where the stable-boysleeps, and we shall soon have the trap out." He chuckled to himselfas he spoke, his eyes twinkled, and he seemed a different man to thesombre thinker of the previous night.
As I dressed I glanced at my watch. It was no wonder that no one wasstirring. It was twenty-five minutes past four. I had hardly finishedwhen Holmes returned with the news that the boy was putting in thehorse.
"I want to test a little theory of mine," said he, pulling on hisboots. "I think, Watson, that you are now standing in the presence ofone of the most absolute fools in Europe. I deserve to be kicked fromhere to Charing Cross. But I think I have the key of the affair now."
"And where is it?" I asked, smiling.
"In the bathroom," he answered. "Oh, yes, I am not joking," hecontinued, seeing my look of incredulity. "I have just been there,and I have taken it out, and I have got it in this Gladstone bag.Come on, my boy, and we shall see whether it will not fit the lock."
We made our way downstairs as quietly as possible, and out into thebright morning sunshine. In the road stood our horse and trap, withthe half-clad stable-boy waiting at the head. We both sprang in, andaway we dashed down the London Road. A few country carts werestirring, bearing in vegetables to the metropolis, but the lines ofvillas on either side were as silent and lifeless as some city in adream.
"It has been in some points a singular case," said Holmes, flickingthe horse on into a gallop. "I confess that I have been as blind as amole, but it is better to learn wisdom late than never to learn it atall."
In town the earliest risers were just beginning to look sleepily fromtheir windows as we drove through the streets of the Surrey side.Passing down the Waterloo Bridge Road we crossed over the river, anddashing up Wellington Street wheeled sharply to the right and foundourselves in Bow Street. Sherlock Holmes was well known to the force,and the two constables at the door saluted him. One of them held thehorse's head while the other led us in.
"Who is on duty?" asked Holmes.
"Inspector Bradstreet, sir."
"Ah, Bradstreet, how are you?" A tall, stout official had come downthe stone-flagged passage, in a peaked cap and frogged jacket. "Iwish to have a quiet word with you, Bradstreet." "Certainly, Mr.Holmes. Step into my room here." It was a small, office-like room,with a huge ledger upon the table, and a telephone projecting fromthe wall. The inspector sat down at his desk.
"What can I do for you, Mr. Holmes?"
"I called about that beggarman, Boone--the one who was charged withbeing concerned in the disappearance of Mr. Neville St. Clair, ofLee."
"Yes. He was brought up and remanded for further inquiries."
"So I heard. You have him here?"
"In the cells."
"Is he quiet?"
"Oh, he gives no trouble. But he is a dirty scoundrel."
"Dirty?"
"Yes, it is all we can do to make him wash his hands, and his face isas black as a tinker's. Well, when once his case has been settled, hewill have a regular prison bath; and I think, if you saw him, youwould agree with me that he needed it."
"I should like to see him very much."
"Would you? That is easily done. Come this way. You can leave yourbag."
"No, I think that I'll take it."
"Very good. Come this way, if you please." He led us down a passage,opened a barred door, passed down a winding stair, and brought us toa whitewashed corridor with a line of doors on each side.
"The third on the right is his," said the inspector. "Here it is!" Hequietly shot back a panel in the upper part of the door and glancedthrough.
"He is asleep," said he. "You can see him very well."
We both put our eyes to the grating. The prisoner lay with his facetowards us, in a very deep sleep, breathing slowly and heavily. Hewas a middle-sized man, coarsely clad as became his calling, with acoloured shirt protruding through the rent in his tattered coat. Hewas, as the inspector had said, extremely dirty, but the grime whichcovered his face could not conceal its repulsive ugliness. A broadwheal from an old scar ran right across it from eye to chin, and byits contraction had turned up one side of the upper lip, so thatthree teeth were exposed in a perpetual snarl. A shock of very brightred hair grew low over his eyes and forehead.
"He's a beauty, isn't he?" said the inspector.
"He certainly needs a wash," remarked Holmes. "I had an idea that hemight, and I took the liberty of bringing the tools with me." Heopened the Gladstone bag as he spoke, and took out, to myastonishment, a very large bath-sponge.
"He! he! You are a funny one," chuckled the inspector.
"Now, if you will have the great goodness to open that door veryquietly, we will soon make him cut a much more respectable figure."
"Well, I don't know why not," said the inspector. "He doesn't look acredit to the Bow Street cells, does he?" He slipped his key into thelock, and we all very quietly entered the cell. The sleeper halfturned, and then settled down once more into a deep slumber. Holmesstooped to the water-jug, moistened his sponge, and then rubbed ittwice vigorously across and down the prisoner's face.
"Let me introduce you," he shouted, "to Mr. Neville St. Clair, ofLee, in the county of Kent."
Never in my life have I seen such a sight. The man's face peeled offunder the sponge like the bark from a tree. Gone was the coarse browntint! Gone, too, was the horrid scar which had seamed it across, andthe twisted lip which had given the repulsive sneer to the face! Atwitch brought away the tangled red hair, and there, sitting up inhis bed, was a pale, sad-faced, refined-looking man, black-haired andsmooth-skinned, rubbing his eyes and staring about him with sleepybewilderment. Then suddenly realising the exposure, he broke into ascream and threw himself down with his face to the pillow.
"Great heavens!" cried the inspector, "it is, indeed, the missingman. I know him from the photograph."
The prisoner turned with the reckless air of a man who abandonshimself to his destiny. "Be it so," said he. "And pray what am Icharged with?"
"With making away with Mr. Neville St.--Oh, come, you can't becharged with that unless they make a case of attempted suicide ofit," said the inspector with a grin. "Well, I have been twenty-sevenyears in the force, but this really takes the cake."
"If I am Mr. Neville St. Clair, then it is obvious that no crime hasbeen committed, and that, therefore, I am illegally detained."
"No crime, but a very great error has been committed," said Holmes."You would have done better to have trusted your wife."
"It was not the wife; it was the children," groaned the prisoner."God help me, I would not have them ashamed of their father. My God!What an exposure! What can I do?"
Sherlock Holmes sat down beside him on the couch and patted himkindly on the shoulder.
"If you leave it to a court of law to clear the matter up," said he,"of course you can hardly avoid publicity. On the other hand, if youconvince the police authorities that there is no possible caseagainst you, I do not know that there is any reason that the detailsshould find their way into the papers. Inspector Bradstreet would, Iam sure, make notes upon anything which you might tell us and submitit to the proper authorities. The case would then never go into courtat all."
"God bless you!" cried the prisoner passionately. "I would haveendured imprisonment, ay, even execution, rather than have left mymiserable secret as a family blot to my children.
"You are the first who have ever heard my story. My father was aschoolmaster in Chesterfield, where I received an excellenteducation. I travelled in my youth, took to the stage, and finallybecame a reporter on an evening paper in London. One day my editorwished to have a series of articles upon begging in the metropolis,and I volunteered to supply them. There was the point from which allmy adventures started. It was only by trying begging as an amateurthat I could get the facts upon which to base my articles. When anactor I had, of course, learned all the secrets of making up, and hadbeen famous in the green-room for my skill. I took advantage now ofmy attainments. I painted my face, and to make myself as pitiable aspossible I made a good scar and fixed one side of my lip in a twistby the aid of a small slip of flesh-coloured plaster. Then with a redhead of hair, and an appropriate dress, I took my station in thebusiness part of the city, ostensibly as a match-seller but really asa beggar. For seven hours I plied my trade, and when I returned homein the evening I found to my surprise that I had received no lessthan 26s. 4d.
"I wrote my articles and thought little more of the matter until,some time later, I backed a bill for a friend and had a writ servedupon me for 25. I was at my wit's end where to get the money, but asudden idea came to me. I begged a fortnight's grace from thecreditor, asked for a holiday from my employers, and spent the timein begging in the City under my disguise. In ten days I had the moneyand had paid the debt.
"Well, you can imagine how hard it was to settle down to arduous workat 2 a week when I knew that I could earn as much in a day bysmearing my face with a little paint, laying my cap on the ground,and sitting still. It was a long fight between my pride and themoney, but the dollars won at last, and I threw up reporting and satday after day in the corner which I had first chosen, inspiring pityby my ghastly face and filling my pockets with coppers. Only one manknew my secret. He was the keeper of a low den in which I used tolodge in Swandam Lane, where I could every morning emerge as asqualid beggar and in the evenings transform myself into awell-dressed man about town. This fellow, a Lascar, was well paid byme for his rooms, so that I knew that my secret was safe in hispossession.
"Well, very soon I found that I was saving considerable sums ofmoney. I do not mean that any beggar in the streets of London couldearn 700 a year--which is less than my average takings--but I hadexceptional advantages in my power of making up, and also in afacility of repartee, which improved by practice and made me quite arecognised character in the City. All day a stream of pennies, variedby silver, poured in upon me, and it was a very bad day in which Ifailed to take 2.
"As I grew richer I grew more ambitious, took a house in the country,and eventually married, without anyone having a suspicion as to myreal occupation. My dear wife knew that I had business in the City.She little knew what.
"Last Monday I had finished for the day and was dressing in my roomabove the opium den when I looked out of my window and saw, to myhorror and astonishment, that my wife was standing in the street,with her eyes fixed full upon me. I gave a cry of surprise, threw upmy arms to cover my face, and, rushing to my confidant, the Lascar,entreated him to prevent anyone from coming up to me. I heard hervoice downstairs, but I knew that she could not ascend. Swiftly Ithrew off my clothes, pulled on those of a beggar, and put on mypigments and wig. Even a wife's eyes could not pierce so complete adisguise. But then it occurred to me that there might be a search inthe room, and that the clothes might betray me. I threw open thewindow, reopening by my violence a small cut which I had inflictedupon myself in the bedroom that morning. Then I seized my coat, whichwas weighted by the coppers which I had just transferred to it fromthe leather bag in which I carried my takings. I hurled it out of thewindow, and it disappeared into the Thames. The other clothes wouldhave followed, but at that moment there was a rush of constables upthe stair, and a few minutes after I found, rather, I confess, to myrelief, that instead of being identified as Mr. Neville St. Clair, Iwas arrested as his murderer.
"I do not know that there is anything else for me to explain. I wasdetermined to preserve my disguise as long as possible, and hence mypreference for a dirty face. Knowing that my wife would be terriblyanxious, I slipped off my ring and confided it to the Lascar at amoment when no constable was watching me, together with a hurriedscrawl, telling her that she had no cause to fear."
"That note only reached her yesterday," said Holmes.
"Good God! What a week she must have spent!"
"The police have watched this Lascar," said Inspector Bradstreet,"and I can quite understand that he might find it difficult to post aletter unobserved. Probably he handed it to some sailor customer ofhis, who forgot all about it for some days."
"That was it," said Holmes, nodding approvingly; "I have no doubt ofit. But have you never been prosecuted for begging?"
"Many times; but what was a fine to me?"
"It must stop here, however," said Bradstreet. "If the police are tohush this thing up, there must be no more of Hugh Boone."
"I have sworn it by the most solemn oaths which a man can take."
"In that case I think that it is probable that no further steps maybe taken. But if you are found again, then all must come out. I amsure, Mr. Holmes, that we are very much indebted to you for havingcleared the matter up. I wish I knew how you reach your results."
"I reached this one," said my friend, "by sitting upon five pillowsand consuming an ounce of shag. I think, Watson, that if we drive toBaker Street we shall just be in time for breakfast."





                  THE ADVENTURE OF THE BLUE CARBUNCLE
I had called upon my friend Sherlock Holmes upon the second morningafter Christmas, with the intention of wishing him the compliments ofthe season. He was lounging upon the sofa in a purple dressing-gown,a pipe-rack within his reach upon the right, and a pile of crumpledmorning papers, evidently newly studied, near at hand. Beside thecouch was a wooden chair, and on the angle of the back hung a veryseedy and disreputable hard-felt hat, much the worse for wear, andcracked in several places. A lens and a forceps lying upon the seatof the chair suggested that the hat had been suspended in this mannerfor the purpose of examination.
"You are engaged," said I; "perhaps I interrupt you."
"Not at all. I am glad to have a friend with whom I can discuss myresults. The matter is a perfectly trivial one"--he jerked his thumbin the direction of the old hat--"but there are points in connectionwith it which are not entirely devoid of interest and even ofinstruction."
I seated myself in his armchair and warmed my hands before hiscrackling fire, for a sharp frost had set in, and the windows werethick with the ice crystals. "I suppose," I remarked, "that, homelyas it looks, this thing has some deadly story linked on to it--thatit is the clue which will guide you in the solution of some mysteryand the punishment of some crime."
"No, no. No crime," said Sherlock Holmes, laughing. "Only one ofthose whimsical little incidents which will happen when you have fourmillion human beings all jostling each other within the space of afew square miles. Amid the action and reaction of so dense a swarm ofhumanity, every possible combination of events may be expected totake place, and many a little problem will be presented which may bestriking and bizarre without being criminal. We have already hadexperience of such."
"So much so," I remarked, "that of the last six cases which I haveadded to my notes, three have been entirely free of any legal crime."
"Precisely. You allude to my attempt to recover the Irene Adlerpapers, to the singular case of Miss Mary Sutherland, and to theadventure of the man with the twisted lip. Well, I have no doubt thatthis small matter will fall into the same innocent category. You knowPeterson, the commissionaire?" 
"Yes."
"It is to him that this trophy belongs."
"It is his hat."
"No, no, he found it. Its owner is unknown. I beg that you will lookupon it not as a battered billycock but as an intellectual problem.And, first, as to how it came here. It arrived upon Christmasmorning, in company with a good fat goose, which is, I have no doubt,roasting at this moment in front of Peterson's fire. The facts arethese: about four o'clock on Christmas morning, Peterson, who, as youknow, is a very honest fellow, was returning from some smalljollification and was making his way homeward down Tottenham CourtRoad. In front of him he saw, in the gaslight, a tallish man, walkingwith a slight stagger, and carrying a white goose slung over hisshoulder. As he reached the corner of Goodge Street, a row broke outbetween this stranger and a little knot of roughs. One of the latterknocked off the man's hat, on which he raised his stick to defendhimself and, swinging it over his head, smashed the shop windowbehind him. Peterson had rushed forward to protect the stranger fromhis assailants; but the man, shocked at having broken the window, andseeing an official-looking person in uniform rushing towards him,dropped his goose, took to his heels, and vanished amid the labyrinthof small streets which lie at the back of Tottenham Court Road. Theroughs had also fled at the appearance of Peterson, so that he wasleft in possession of the field of battle, and also of the spoils ofvictory in the shape of this battered hat and a most unimpeachableChristmas goose."
"Which surely he restored to their owner?"
"My dear fellow, there lies the problem. It is true that 'For Mrs.Henry Baker' was printed upon a small card which was tied to thebird's left leg, and it is also true that the initials 'H. B.' arelegible upon the lining of this hat, but as there are some thousandsof Bakers, and some hundreds of Henry Bakers in this city of ours, itis not easy to restore lost property to any one of them."
"What, then, did Peterson do?"
"He brought round both hat and goose to me on Christmas morning,knowing that even the smallest problems are of interest to me. Thegoose we retained until this morning, when there were signs that, inspite of the slight frost, it would be well that it should be eatenwithout unnecessary delay. Its finder has carried it off, therefore,to fulfil the ultimate destiny of a goose, while I continue to retainthe hat of the unknown gentleman who lost his Christmas dinner."
"Did he not advertise?"
"No."
"Then, what clue could you have as to his identity?"
"Only as much as we can deduce."
"From his hat?"
"Precisely."
"But you are joking. What can you gather from this old batteredfelt?"
"Here is my lens. You know my methods. What can you gather yourselfas to the individuality of the man who has worn this article?"
I took the tattered object in my hands and turned it over ratherruefully. It was a very ordinary black hat of the usual round shape,hard and much the worse for wear. The lining had been of red silk,but was a good deal discoloured. There was no maker's name; but, asHolmes had remarked, the initials "H. B." were scrawled upon oneside. It was pierced in the brim for a hat-securer, but the elasticwas missing. For the rest, it was cracked, exceedingly dusty, andspotted in several places, although there seemed to have been someattempt to hide the discoloured patches by smearing them with ink.
"I can see nothing," said I, handing it back to my friend.
"On the contrary, Watson, you can see everything. You fail, however,to reason from what you see. You are too timid in drawing yourinferences."
"Then, pray tell me what it is that you can infer from this hat?"
He picked it up and gazed at it in the peculiar introspective fashionwhich was characteristic of him. "It is perhaps less suggestive thanit might have been," he remarked, "and yet there are a few inferenceswhich are very distinct, and a few others which represent at least astrong balance of probability. That the man was highly intellectualis of course obvious upon the face of it, and also that he was fairlywell-to-do within the last three years, although he has now fallenupon evil days. He had foresight, but has less now than formerly,pointing to a moral retrogression, which, when taken with the declineof his fortunes, seems to indicate some evil influence, probablydrink, at work upon him. This may account also for the obvious factthat his wife has ceased to love him."
"My dear Holmes!"
"He has, however, retained some degree of self-respect," hecontinued, disregarding my remonstrance. "He is a man who leads asedentary life, goes out little, is out of training entirely, ismiddle-aged, has grizzled hair which he has had cut within the lastfew days, and which he anoints with lime-cream. These are the morepatent facts which are to be deduced from his hat. Also, by the way,that it is extremely improbable that he has gas laid on in hishouse."
"You are certainly joking, Holmes."
"Not in the least. Is it possible that even now, when I give youthese results, you are unable to see how they are attained?"
"I have no doubt that I am very stupid, but I must confess that I amunable to follow you. For example, how did you deduce that this manwas intellectual?"
For answer Holmes clapped the hat upon his head. It came right overthe forehead and settled upon the bridge of his nose. "It is aquestion of cubic capacity," said he; "a man with so large a brainmust have something in it."
"The decline of his fortunes, then?"
"This hat is three years old. These flat brims curled at the edgecame in then. It is a hat of the very best quality. Look at the bandof ribbed silk and the excellent lining. If this man could afford tobuy so expensive a hat three years ago, and has had no hat since,then he has assuredly gone down in the world."
"Well, that is clear enough, certainly. But how about the foresightand the moral retrogression?"
Sherlock Holmes laughed. "Here is the foresight," said he putting hisfinger upon the little disc and loop of the hat-securer.  "They arenever sold upon hats. If this man ordered one, it is a sign of acertain amount of foresight, since he went out of his way to takethis precaution against the wind. But since we see that he has brokenthe elastic and has not troubled to replace it, it is obvious that hehas less foresight now than formerly, which is a distinct proof of aweakening nature. On the other hand, he has endeavoured to concealsome of these stains upon the felt by daubing them with ink, which isa sign that he has not entirely lost his self-respect."
"Your reasoning is certainly plausible."
"The further points, that he is middle-aged, that his hair isgrizzled, that it has been recently cut, and that he uses lime-cream,are all to be gathered from a close examination of the lower part ofthe lining. The lens discloses a large number of hair-ends, clean cutby the scissors of the barber. They all appear to be adhesive, andthere is a distinct odour of lime-cream. This dust, you will observe,is not the gritty, grey dust of the street but the fluffy brown dustof the house, showing that it has been hung up indoors most of thetime, while the marks of moisture upon the inside are proof positivethat the wearer perspired very freely, and could therefore, hardly bein the best of training."
"But his wife--you said that she had ceased to love him."
"This hat has not been brushed for weeks. When I see you, my dearWatson, with a week's accumulation of dust upon your hat, and whenyour wife allows you to go out in such a state, I shall fear that youalso have been unfortunate enough to lose your wife's affection."
"But he might be a bachelor."
"Nay, he was bringing home the goose as a peace-offering to his wife.Remember the card upon the bird's leg."
"You have an answer to everything. But how on earth do you deducethat the gas is not laid on in his house?"
"One tallow stain, or even two, might come by chance; but when I seeno less than five, I think that there can be little doubt that theindividual must be brought into frequent contact with burningtallow--walks upstairs at night probably with his hat in one hand anda guttering candle in the other. Anyhow, he never got tallow-stainsfrom a gas-jet. Are you satisfied?"
"Well, it is very ingenious," said I, laughing; "but since, as yousaid just now, there has been no crime committed, and no harm donesave the loss of a goose, all this seems to be rather a waste ofenergy."
Sherlock Holmes had opened his mouth to reply, when the door flewopen, and Peterson, the commissionaire, rushed into the apartmentwith flushed cheeks and the face of a man who is dazed withastonishment.
"The goose, Mr. Holmes! The goose, sir!" he gasped.
"Eh? What of it, then? Has it returned to life and flapped offthrough the kitchen window?" Holmes twisted himself round upon thesofa to get a fairer view of the man's excited face.
"See here, sir! See what my wife found in its crop!" He held out hishand and displayed upon the centre of the palm a brilliantlyscintillating blue stone, rather smaller than a bean in size, but ofsuch purity and radiance that it twinkled like an electric point inthe dark hollow of his hand.
Sherlock Holmes sat up with a whistle. "By Jove, Peterson!" said he,"this is treasure trove indeed. I suppose you know what you havegot?"
"A diamond, sir? A precious stone. It cuts into glass as though itwere putty."
"It's more than a precious stone. It is the precious stone."
"Not the Countess of Morcar's blue carbuncle!" I ejaculated.
"Precisely so. I ought to know its size and shape, seeing that I haveread the advertisement about it in The Times every day lately. It isabsolutely unique, and its value can only be conjectured, but thereward offered of 1000 is certainly not within a twentieth part ofthe market price."
"A thousand pounds! Great Lord of mercy!" The commissionaire plumpeddown into a chair and stared from one to the other of us.
"That is the reward, and I have reason to know that there aresentimental considerations in the background which would induce theCountess to part with half her fortune if she could but recover thegem."
"It was lost, if I remember aright, at the Hotel Cosmopolitan," Iremarked.
"Precisely so, on December 22nd, just five days ago. John Horner, aplumber, was accused of having abstracted it from the lady'sjewel-case. The evidence against him was so strong that the case hasbeen referred to the Assizes. I have some account of the matter here,I believe." He rummaged amid his newspapers, glancing over the dates,until at last he smoothed one out, doubled it over, and read thefollowing paragraph:
"Hotel Cosmopolitan Jewel Robbery. John Horner, 26, plumber, wasbrought up upon the charge of having upon the 22nd inst. abstractedfrom the jewel-case of the Countess of Morcar the valuable gem knownas the blue carbuncle. James Ryder, upper-attendant at the hotel,gave his evidence to the effect that he had shown Horner up to thedressing-room of the Countess of Morcar upon the day of the robberyin order that he might solder the second bar of the grate, which wasloose. He had remained with Horner some little time, but had finallybeen called away. On returning, he found that Horner had disappeared,that the bureau had been forced open, and that the small moroccocasket in which, as it afterwards transpired, the Countess wasaccustomed to keep her jewel, was lying empty upon thedressing-table. Ryder instantly gave the alarm, and Horner wasarrested the same evening; but the stone could not be found eitherupon his person or in his rooms. Catherine Cusack, maid to theCountess, deposed to having heard Ryder's cry of dismay ondiscovering the robbery, and to having rushed into the room, whereshe found matters as described by the last witness. InspectorBradstreet, B division, gave evidence as to the arrest of Horner, whostruggled frantically, and protested his innocence in the strongestterms. Evidence of a previous conviction for robbery having beengiven against the prisoner, the magistrate refused to deal summarilywith the offence, but referred it to the Assizes. Horner, who hadshown signs of intense emotion during the proceedings, fainted awayat the conclusion and was carried out of court."
"Hum! So much for the police-court," said Holmes thoughtfully,tossing aside the paper. "The question for us now to solve is thesequence of events leading from a rifled jewel-case at one end to thecrop of a goose in Tottenham Court Road at the other. You see,Watson, our little deductions have suddenly assumed a much moreimportant and less innocent aspect. Here is the stone; the stone camefrom the goose, and the goose came from Mr. Henry Baker, thegentleman with the bad hat and all the other characteristics withwhich I have bored you. So now we must set ourselves very seriouslyto finding this gentleman and ascertaining what part he has played inthis little mystery. To do this, we must try the simplest meansfirst, and these lie undoubtedly in an advertisement in all theevening papers. If this fail, I shall have recourse to othermethods."
"What will you say?"
"Give me a pencil and that slip of paper. Now, then: 'Found at thecorner of Goodge Street, a goose and a black felt hat. Mr. HenryBaker can have the same by applying at 6.30 this evening at 221b,Baker Street.' That is clear and concise."
"Very. But will he see it?"
"Well, he is sure to keep an eye on the papers, since, to a poor man,the loss was a heavy one. He was clearly so scared by his mischancein breaking the window and by the approach of Peterson that hethought of nothing but flight, but since then he must have bitterlyregretted the impulse which caused him to drop his bird. Then, again,the introduction of his name will cause him to see it, for everyonewho knows him will direct his attention to it. Here you are,Peterson, run down to the advertising agency and have this put in theevening papers."
"In which, sir?"
"Oh, in the Globe, Star, Pall Mall, St. James's, Evening News,Standard, Echo, and any others that occur to you."
"Very well, sir. And this stone?"
"Ah, yes, I shall keep the stone. Thank you. And, I say, Peterson,just buy a goose on your way back and leave it here with me, for wemust have one to give to this gentleman in place of the one whichyour family is now devouring."
When the commissionaire had gone, Holmes took up the stone and heldit against the light. "It's a bonny thing," said he. "Just see how itglints and sparkles. Of course it is a nucleus and focus of crime.Every good stone is. They are the devil's pet baits. In the largerand older jewels every facet may stand for a bloody deed. This stoneis not yet twenty years old. It was found in the banks of the AmoyRiver in southern China and is remarkable in having everycharacteristic of the carbuncle, save that it is blue in shadeinstead of ruby red. In spite of its youth, it has already a sinisterhistory. There have been two murders, a vitriol-throwing, a suicide,and several robberies brought about for the sake of this forty-grainweight of crystallised charcoal. Who would think that so pretty a toywould be a purveyor to the gallows and the prison? I'll lock it up inmy strong box now and drop a line to the Countess to say that we haveit."
"Do you think that this man Horner is innocent?"
"I cannot tell."
"Well, then, do you imagine that this other one, Henry Baker, hadanything to do with the matter?"
"It is, I think, much more likely that Henry Baker is an absolutelyinnocent man, who had no idea that the bird which he was carrying wasof considerably more value than if it were made of solid gold. That,however, I shall determine by a very simple test if we have an answerto our advertisement."
"And you can do nothing until then?"
"Nothing."
"In that case I shall continue my professional round. But I shallcome back in the evening at the hour you have mentioned, for I shouldlike to see the solution of so tangled a business."
"Very glad to see you. I dine at seven. There is a woodcock, Ibelieve. By the way, in view of recent occurrences, perhaps I oughtto ask Mrs. Hudson to examine its crop."
I had been delayed at a case, and it was a little after half-past sixwhen I found myself in Baker Street once more. As I approached thehouse I saw a tall man in a Scotch bonnet with a coat which wasbuttoned up to his chin waiting outside in the bright semicirclewhich was thrown from the fanlight. Just as I arrived the door wasopened, and we were shown up together to Holmes' room.
"Mr. Henry Baker, I believe," said he, rising from his armchair andgreeting his visitor with the easy air of geniality which he could soreadily assume. "Pray take this chair by the fire, Mr. Baker. It is acold night, and I observe that your circulation is more adapted forsummer than for winter. Ah, Watson, you have just come at the righttime. Is that your hat, Mr. Baker?"
"Yes, sir, that is undoubtedly my hat."
He was a large man with rounded shoulders, a massive head, and abroad, intelligent face, sloping down to a pointed beard of grizzledbrown. A touch of red in nose and cheeks, with a slight tremor of hisextended hand, recalled Holmes' surmise as to his habits. His rustyblack frock-coat was buttoned right up in front, with the collarturned up, and his lank wrists protruded from his sleeves without asign of cuff or shirt. He spoke in a slow staccato fashion, choosinghis words with care, and gave the impression generally of a man oflearning and letters who had had ill-usage at the hands of fortune.
"We have retained these things for some days," said Holmes, "becausewe expected to see an advertisement from you giving your address. Iam at a loss to know now why you did not advertise."
Our visitor gave a rather shamefaced laugh. "Shillings have not beenso plentiful with me as they once were," he remarked. "I had no doubtthat the gang of roughs who assaulted me had carried off both my hatand the bird. I did not care to spend more money in a hopelessattempt at recovering them."
"Very naturally. By the way, about the bird, we were compelled to eatit."
"To eat it!" Our visitor half rose from his chair in his excitement.
"Yes, it would have been of no use to anyone had we not done so. ButI presume that this other goose upon the sideboard, which is aboutthe same weight and perfectly fresh, will answer your purpose equallywell?"
"Oh, certainly, certainly," answered Mr. Baker with a sigh of relief.
"Of course, we still have the feathers, legs, crop, and so on of yourown bird, so if you wish--"
The man burst into a hearty laugh. "They might be useful to me asrelics of my adventure," said he, "but beyond that I can hardly seewhat use the disjecta membra of my late acquaintance are going to beto me. No, sir, I think that, with your permission, I will confine myattentions to the excellent bird which I perceive upon thesideboard."
Sherlock Holmes glanced sharply across at me with a slight shrug ofhis shoulders.
"There is your hat, then, and there your bird," said he. "By the way,would it bore you to tell me where you got the other one from? I amsomewhat of a fowl fancier, and I have seldom seen a better growngoose."
"Certainly, sir," said Baker, who had risen and tucked his newlygained property under his arm. "There are a few of us who frequentthe Alpha Inn, near the Museum--we are to be found in the Museumitself during the day, you understand. This year our good host,Windigate by name, instituted a goose club, by which, onconsideration of some few pence every week, we were each to receive abird at Christmas. My pence were duly paid, and the rest is familiarto you. I am much indebted to you, sir, for a Scotch bonnet is fittedneither to my years nor my gravity." With a comical pomposity ofmanner he bowed solemnly to both of us and strode off upon his way.
"So much for Mr. Henry Baker," said Holmes when he had closed thedoor behind him. "It is quite certain that he knows nothing whateverabout the matter. Are you hungry, Watson?"
"Not particularly."
"Then I suggest that we turn our dinner into a supper and follow upthis clue while it is still hot."
"By all means."
It was a bitter night, so we drew on our ulsters and wrapped cravatsabout our throats. Outside, the stars were shining coldly in acloudless sky, and the breath of the passers-by blew out into smokelike so many pistol shots. Our footfalls rang out crisply and loudlyas we swung through the doctors' quarter, Wimpole Street, HarleyStreet, and so through Wigmore Street into Oxford Street. In aquarter of an hour we were in Bloomsbury at the Alpha Inn, which is asmall public-house at the corner of one of the streets which runsdown into Holborn. Holmes pushed open the door of the private bar andordered two glasses of beer from the ruddy-faced, white-apronedlandlord.
"Your beer should be excellent if it is as good as your geese," saidhe.
"My geese!" The man seemed surprised.
"Yes. I was speaking only half an hour ago to Mr. Henry Baker, whowas a member of your goose club."
"Ah! yes, I see. But you see, sir, them's not our geese."
"Indeed! Whose, then?"
"Well, I got the two dozen from a salesman in Covent Garden."
"Indeed? I know some of them. Which was it?"
"Breckinridge is his name."
"Ah! I don't know him. Well, here's your good health landlord, andprosperity to your house. Good-night."
"Now for Mr. Breckinridge," he continued, buttoning up his coat as wecame out into the frosty air. "Remember, Watson that though we haveso homely a thing as a goose at one end of this chain, we have at theother a man who will certainly get seven years' penal servitudeunless we can establish his innocence. It is possible that ourinquiry may but confirm his guilt; but, in any case, we have a lineof investigation which has been missed by the police, and which asingular chance has placed in our hands. Let us follow it out to thebitter end. Faces to the south, then, and quick march!"
We passed across Holborn, down Endell Street, and so through a zigzagof slums to Covent Garden Market. One of the largest stalls bore thename of Breckinridge upon it, and the proprietor a horsey-lookingman, with a sharp face and trim side-whiskers was helping a boy toput up the shutters.
"Good-evening. It's a cold night," said Holmes.
The salesman nodded and shot a questioning glance at my companion.
"Sold out of geese, I see," continued Holmes, pointing at the bareslabs of marble.
"Let you have five hundred to-morrow morning."
"That's no good."
"Well, there are some on the stall with the gas-flare."
"Ah, but I was recommended to you."
"Who by?"
"The landlord of the Alpha."
"Oh, yes; I sent him a couple of dozen."
"Fine birds they were, too. Now where did you get them from?"
To my surprise the question provoked a burst of anger from thesalesman.
"Now, then, mister," said he, with his head cocked and his armsakimbo, "what are you driving at? Let's have it straight, now."
"It is straight enough. I should like to know who sold you the geesewhich you supplied to the Alpha."
"Well then, I shan't tell you. So now!"
"Oh, it is a matter of no importance; but I don't know why you shouldbe so warm over such a trifle."
"Warm! You'd be as warm, maybe, if you were as pestered as I am. WhenI pay good money for a good article there should be an end of thebusiness; but it's 'Where are the geese?' and 'Who did you sell thegeese to?' and 'What will you take for the geese?' One would thinkthey were the only geese in the world, to hear the fuss that is madeover them."
"Well, I have no connection with any other people who have beenmaking inquiries," said Holmes carelessly. "If you won't tell us thebet is off, that is all. But I'm always ready to back my opinion on amatter of fowls, and I have a fiver on it that the bird I ate iscountry bred."
"Well, then, you've lost your fiver, for it's town bred," snapped thesalesman.
"It's nothing of the kind."
"I say it is."
"I don't believe it."
"D'you think you know more about fowls than I, who have handled themever since I was a nipper? I tell you, all those birds that went tothe Alpha were town bred."
"You'll never persuade me to believe that."
"Will you bet, then?"
"It's merely taking your money, for I know that I am right. But I'llhave a sovereign on with you, just to teach you not to be obstinate."
The salesman chuckled grimly. "Bring me the books, Bill," said he.
The small boy brought round a small thin volume and a greatgreasy-backed one, laying them out together beneath the hanging lamp.
"Now then, Mr. Cocksure," said the salesman, "I thought that I wasout of geese, but before I finish you'll find that there is still oneleft in my shop. You see this little book?"
"Well?"
"That's the list of the folk from whom I buy. D'you see? Well, then,here on this page are the country folk, and the numbers after theirnames are where their accounts are in the big ledger. Now, then! Yousee this other page in red ink? Well, that is a list of my townsuppliers. Now, look at that third name. Just read it out to me."
"Mrs. Oakshott, 117, Brixton Road--249," read Holmes.
"Quite so. Now turn that up in the ledger."
Holmes turned to the page indicated. "Here you are, 'Mrs. Oakshott,117, Brixton Road, egg and poultry supplier.'"
"Now, then, what's the last entry?"
"'December 22nd. Twenty-four geese at 7s. 6d.'"
"Quite so. There you are. And underneath?"
"'Sold to Mr. Windigate of the Alpha, at 12s.'"
"What have you to say now?"
Sherlock Holmes looked deeply chagrined. He drew a sovereign from hispocket and threw it down upon the slab, turning away with the air ofa man whose disgust is too deep for words. A few yards off he stoppedunder a lamp-post and laughed in the hearty, noiseless fashion whichwas peculiar to him.
"When you see a man with whiskers of that cut and the 'Pink 'un'protruding out of his pocket, you can always draw him by a bet," saidhe. "I daresay that if I had put 100 down in front of him, that manwould not have given me such complete information as was drawn fromhim by the idea that he was doing me on a wager. Well, Watson, weare, I fancy, nearing the end of our quest, and the only point whichremains to be determined is whether we should go on to this Mrs.Oakshott to-night, or whether we should reserve it for to-morrow. Itis clear from what that surly fellow said that there are othersbesides ourselves who are anxious about the matter, and I should--"
His remarks were suddenly cut short by a loud hubbub which broke outfrom the stall which we had just left. Turning round we saw a littlerat-faced fellow standing in the centre of the circle of yellow lightwhich was thrown by the swinging lamp, while Breckinridge, thesalesman, framed in the door of his stall, was shaking his fistsfiercely at the cringing figure.
"I've had enough of you and your geese," he shouted. "I wish you wereall at the devil together. If you come pestering me any more withyour silly talk I'll set the dog at you. You bring Mrs. Oakshott hereand I'll answer her, but what have you to do with it? Did I buy thegeese off you?"
"No; but one of them was mine all the same," whined the little man.
"Well, then, ask Mrs. Oakshott for it."
"She told me to ask you."
"Well, you can ask the King of Proosia, for all I care. I've hadenough of it. Get out of this!" He rushed fiercely forward, and theinquirer flitted away into the darkness.
"Ha! this may save us a visit to Brixton Road," whispered Holmes."Come with me, and we will see what is to be made of this fellow."Striding through the scattered knots of people who lounged round theflaring stalls, my companion speedily overtook the little man andtouched him upon the shoulder. He sprang round, and I could see inthe gas-light that every vestige of colour had been driven from hisface.
"Who are you, then? What do you want?" he asked in a quavering voice.
"You will excuse me," said Holmes blandly, "but I could not helpoverhearing the questions which you put to the salesman just now. Ithink that I could be of assistance to you."
"You? Who are you? How could you know anything of the matter?"
"My name is Sherlock Holmes. It is my business to know what otherpeople don't know."
"But you can know nothing of this?"
"Excuse me, I know everything of it. You are endeavouring to tracesome geese which were sold by Mrs. Oakshott, of Brixton Road, to asalesman named Breckinridge, by him in turn to Mr. Windigate, of theAlpha, and by him to his club, of which Mr. Henry Baker is a member."
"Oh, sir, you are the very man whom I have longed to meet," cried thelittle fellow with outstretched hands and quivering fingers. "I canhardly explain to you how interested I am in this matter."
Sherlock Holmes hailed a four-wheeler which was passing. "In thatcase we had better discuss it in a cosy room rather than in thiswind-swept market-place," said he. "But pray tell me, before we gofarther, who it is that I have the pleasure of assisting."
The man hesitated for an instant. "My name is John Robinson," heanswered with a sidelong glance.
"No, no; the real name," said Holmes sweetly. "It is always awkwarddoing business with an alias."
A flush sprang to the white cheeks of the stranger. "Well then," saidhe, "my real name is James Ryder."
"Precisely so. Head attendant at the Hotel Cosmopolitan. Pray stepinto the cab, and I shall soon be able to tell you everything whichyou would wish to know."
The little man stood glancing from one to the other of us withhalf-frightened, half-hopeful eyes, as one who is not sure whether heis on the verge of a windfall or of a catastrophe. Then he steppedinto the cab, and in half an hour we were back in the sitting-room atBaker Street. Nothing had been said during our drive, but the high,thin breathing of our new companion, and the claspings andunclaspings of his hands, spoke of the nervous tension within him.
"Here we are!" said Holmes cheerily as we filed into the room. "Thefire looks very seasonable in this weather. You look cold, Mr. Ryder.Pray take the basket-chair. I will just put on my slippers before wesettle this little matter of yours. Now, then! You want to know whatbecame of those geese?"
"Yes, sir."
"Or rather, I fancy, of that goose. It was one bird, I imagine inwhich you were interested--white, with a black bar across the tail."
Ryder quivered with emotion. "Oh, sir," he cried, "can you tell mewhere it went to?"
"It came here."
"Here?"
"Yes, and a most remarkable bird it proved. I don't wonder that youshould take an interest in it. It laid an egg after it was dead--thebonniest, brightest little blue egg that ever was seen. I have ithere in my museum."
Our visitor staggered to his feet and clutched the mantelpiece withhis right hand. Holmes unlocked his strong-box and held up the bluecarbuncle, which shone out like a star, with a cold, brilliant,many-pointed radiance. Ryder stood glaring with a drawn face,uncertain whether to claim or to disown it.
"The game's up, Ryder," said Holmes quietly. "Hold up, man, or you'llbe into the fire! Give him an arm back into his chair, Watson. He'snot got blood enough to go in for felony with impunity. Give him adash of brandy. So! Now he looks a little more human. What a shrimpit is, to be sure!"
For a moment he had staggered and nearly fallen, but the brandybrought a tinge of colour into his cheeks, and he sat staring withfrightened eyes at his accuser.
"I have almost every link in my hands, and all the proofs which Icould possibly need, so there is little which you need tell me.Still, that little may as well be cleared up to make the casecomplete. You had heard, Ryder, of this blue stone of the Countess ofMorcar's?"
"It was Catherine Cusack who told me of it," said he in a cracklingvoice.
"I see--her ladyship's waiting-maid. Well, the temptation of suddenwealth so easily acquired was too much for you, as it has been forbetter men before you; but you were not very scrupulous in the meansyou used. It seems to me, Ryder, that there is the making of a verypretty villain in you. You knew that this man Horner, the plumber,had been concerned in some such matter before, and that suspicionwould rest the more readily upon him. What did you do, then? You madesome small job in my lady's room--you and your confederateCusack--and you managed that he should be the man sent for. Then,when he had left, you rifled the jewel-case, raised the alarm, andhad this unfortunate man arrested. You then--"
Ryder threw himself down suddenly upon the rug and clutched at mycompanion's knees. "For God's sake, have mercy!" he shrieked. "Thinkof my father! Of my mother! It would break their hearts. I never wentwrong before! I never will again. I swear it. I'll swear it on aBible. Oh, don't bring it into court! For Christ's sake, don't!"
"Get back into your chair!" said Holmes sternly. "It is very well tocringe and crawl now, but you thought little enough of this poorHorner in the dock for a crime of which he knew nothing."
"I will fly, Mr. Holmes. I will leave the country, sir. Then thecharge against him will break down."
"Hum! We will talk about that. And now let us hear a true account ofthe next act. How came the stone into the goose, and how came thegoose into the open market? Tell us the truth, for there lies youronly hope of safety."
Ryder passed his tongue over his parched lips. "I will tell you itjust as it happened, sir," said he. "When Horner had been arrested,it seemed to me that it would be best for me to get away with thestone at once, for I did not know at what moment the police might nottake it into their heads to search me and my room. There was no placeabout the hotel where it would be safe. I went out, as if on somecommission, and I made for my sister's house. She had married a mannamed Oakshott, and lived in Brixton Road, where she fattened fowlsfor the market. All the way there every man I met seemed to me to bea policeman or a detective; and, for all that it was a cold night,the sweat was pouring down my face before I came to the Brixton Road.My sister asked me what was the matter, and why I was so pale; but Itold her that I had been upset by the jewel robbery at the hotel.Then I went into the back yard and smoked a pipe and wondered what itwould be best to do.
"I had a friend once called Maudsley, who went to the bad, and hasjust been serving his time in Pentonville. One day he had met me, andfell into talk about the ways of thieves, and how they could get ridof what they stole. I knew that he would be true to me, for I knewone or two things about him; so I made up my mind to go right on toKilburn, where he lived, and take him into my confidence. He wouldshow me how to turn the stone into money. But how to get to him insafety? I thought of the agonies I had gone through in coming fromthe hotel. I might at any moment be seized and searched, and therewould be the stone in my waistcoat pocket. I was leaning against thewall at the time and looking at the geese which were waddling aboutround my feet, and suddenly an idea came into my head which showed mehow I could beat the best detective that ever lived.
"My sister had told me some weeks before that I might have the pickof her geese for a Christmas present, and I knew that she was alwaysas good as her word. I would take my goose now, and in it I wouldcarry my stone to Kilburn. There was a little shed in the yard, andbehind this I drove one of the birds--a fine big one, white, with abarred tail. I caught it, and prying its bill open, I thrust thestone down its throat as far as my finger could reach. The bird gavea gulp, and I felt the stone pass along its gullet and down into itscrop. But the creature flapped and struggled, and out came my sisterto know what was the matter. As I turned to speak to her the brutebroke loose and fluttered off among the others.
"'Whatever were you doing with that bird, Jem?' says she.
"'Well,' said I, 'you said you'd give me one for Christmas, and I wasfeeling which was the fattest.'
"'Oh,' says she, 'we've set yours aside for you--Jem's bird, we callit. It's the big white one over yonder. There's twenty-six of them,which makes one for you, and one for us, and two dozen for themarket.'
"'Thank you, Maggie,' says I; 'but if it is all the same to you, I'drather have that one I was handling just now.'
"'The other is a good three pound heavier,' said she, 'and wefattened it expressly for you.'
"'Never mind. I'll have the other, and I'll take it now,' said I.
"'Oh, just as you like,' said she, a little huffed. 'Which is it youwant, then?'
"'That white one with the barred tail, right in the middle of theflock.'
"'Oh, very well. Kill it and take it with you.'
"Well, I did what she said, Mr. Holmes, and I carried the bird allthe way to Kilburn. I told my pal what I had done, for he was a manthat it was easy to tell a thing like that to. He laughed until hechoked, and we got a knife and opened the goose. My heart turned towater, for there was no sign of the stone, and I knew that someterrible mistake had occurred. I left the bird, rushed back to mysister's, and hurried into the back yard. There was not a bird to beseen there.
"'Where are they all, Maggie?' I cried.
"'Gone to the dealer's, Jem.'
"'Which dealer's?'
"'Breckinridge, of Covent Garden.'
"'But was there another with a barred tail?' I asked, 'the same asthe one I chose?'
"'Yes, Jem; there were two barred-tailed ones, and I could never tellthem apart.'
"Well, then, of course I saw it all, and I ran off as hard as my feetwould carry me to this man Breckinridge; but he had sold the lot atonce, and not one word would he tell me as to where they had gone.You heard him yourselves to-night. Well, he has always answered melike that. My sister thinks that I am going mad. Sometimes I thinkthat I am myself. And now--and now I am myself a branded thief,without ever having touched the wealth for which I sold my character.God help me! God help me!" He burst into convulsive sobbing, with hisface buried in his hands.
There was a long silence, broken only by his heavy breathing and bythe measured tapping of Sherlock Holmes' finger-tips upon the edge ofthe table. Then my friend rose and threw open the door.
"Get out!" said he.
"What, sir! Oh, Heaven bless you!"
"No more words. Get out!"
And no more words were needed. There was a rush, a clatter upon thestairs, the bang of a door, and the crisp rattle of running footfallsfrom the street.
"After all, Watson," said Holmes, reaching up his hand for his claypipe, "I am not retained by the police to supply their deficiencies.If Horner were in danger it would be another thing; but this fellowwill not appear against him, and the case must collapse. I supposethat I am commuting a felony, but it is just possible that I amsaving a soul. This fellow will not go wrong again; he is tooterribly frightened. Send him to jail now, and you make him ajail-bird for life. Besides, it is the season of forgiveness. Chancehas put in our way a most singular and whimsical problem, and itssolution is its own reward. If you will have the goodness to touchthe bell, Doctor, we will begin another investigation, in which, alsoa bird will be the chief feature."





                  THE ADVENTURE OF THE SPECKLED BAND
On glancing over my notes of the seventy odd cases in which I haveduring the last eight years studied the methods of my friend SherlockHolmes, I find many tragic, some comic, a large number merelystrange, but none commonplace; for, working as he did rather for thelove of his art than for the acquirement of wealth, he refused toassociate himself with any investigation which did not tend towardsthe unusual, and even the fantastic. Of all these varied cases,however, I cannot recall any which presented more singular featuresthan that which was associated with the well-known Surrey family ofthe Roylotts of Stoke Moran. The events in question occurred in theearly days of my association with Holmes, when we were sharing roomsas bachelors in Baker Street. It is possible that I might have placedthem upon record before, but a promise of secrecy was made at thetime, from which I have only been freed during the last month by theuntimely death of the lady to whom the pledge was given. It isperhaps as well that the facts should now come to light, for I havereasons to know that there are widespread rumours as to the death ofDr. Grimesby Roylott which tend to make the matter even more terriblethan the truth.
It was early in April in the year '83 that I woke one morning to findSherlock Holmes standing, fully dressed, by the side of my bed. Hewas a late riser, as a rule, and as the clock on the mantelpieceshowed me that it was only a quarter-past seven, I blinked up at himin some surprise, and perhaps just a little resentment, for I wasmyself regular in my habits.
"Very sorry to knock you up, Watson," said he, "but it's the commonlot this morning. Mrs. Hudson has been knocked up, she retorted uponme, and I on you."
"What is it, then--a fire?"
"No; a client. It seems that a young lady has arrived in aconsiderable state of excitement, who insists upon seeing me. She iswaiting now in the sitting-room. Now, when young ladies wander aboutthe metropolis at this hour of the morning, and knock sleepy peopleup out of their beds, I presume that it is something very pressingwhich they have to communicate. Should it prove to be an interestingcase, you would, I am sure, wish to follow it from the outset. Ithought, at any rate, that I should call you and give you thechance."
"My dear fellow, I would not miss it for anything."
I had no keener pleasure than in following Holmes in his professionalinvestigations, and in admiring the rapid deductions, as swift asintuitions, and yet always founded on a logical basis with which heunravelled the problems which were submitted to him. I rapidly threwon my clothes and was ready in a few minutes to accompany my frienddown to the sitting-room. A lady dressed in black and heavily veiled,who had been sitting in the window, rose as we entered.
"Good-morning, madam," said Holmes cheerily. "My name is SherlockHolmes. This is my intimate friend and associate, Dr. Watson, beforewhom you can speak as freely as before myself. Ha! I am glad to seethat Mrs. Hudson has had the good sense to light the fire. Pray drawup to it, and I shall order you a cup of hot coffee, for I observethat you are shivering."
"It is not cold which makes me shiver," said the woman in a lowvoice, changing her seat as requested.
"What, then?"
"It is fear, Mr. Holmes. It is terror." She raised her veil as shespoke, and we could see that she was indeed in a pitiable state ofagitation, her face all drawn and grey, with restless frightenedeyes, like those of some hunted animal. Her features and figure werethose of a woman of thirty, but her hair was shot with prematuregrey, and her expression was weary and haggard. Sherlock Holmes ranher over with one of his quick, all-comprehensive glances.
"You must not fear," said he soothingly, bending forward and pattingher forearm. "We shall soon set matters right, I have no doubt. Youhave come in by train this morning, I see."
"You know me, then?"
"No, but I observe the second half of a return ticket in the palm ofyour left glove. You must have started early, and yet you had a gooddrive in a dog-cart, along heavy roads, before you reached thestation."
The lady gave a violent start and stared in bewilderment at mycompanion.
"There is no mystery, my dear madam," said he, smiling. "The left armof your jacket is spattered with mud in no less than seven places.The marks are perfectly fresh. There is no vehicle save a dog-cartwhich throws up mud in that way, and then only when you sit on theleft-hand side of the driver."
"Whatever your reasons may be, you are perfectly correct," said she."I started from home before six, reached Leatherhead at twenty past,and came in by the first train to Waterloo. Sir, I can stand thisstrain no longer; I shall go mad if it continues. I have no one toturn to--none, save only one, who cares for me, and he, poor fellow,can be of little aid. I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes; I have heardof you from Mrs. Farintosh, whom you helped in the hour of her soreneed. It was from her that I had your address. Oh, sir, do you notthink that you could help me, too, and at least throw a little lightthrough the dense darkness which surrounds me? At present it is outof my power to reward you for your services, but in a month or sixweeks I shall be married, with the control of my own income, and thenat least you shall not find me ungrateful."
Holmes turned to his desk and, unlocking it, drew out a smallcase-book, which he consulted.
"Farintosh," said he. "Ah yes, I recall the case; it was concernedwith an opal tiara. I think it was before your time, Watson. I canonly say, madam, that I shall be happy to devote the same care toyour case as I did to that of your friend. As to reward, myprofession is its own reward; but you are at liberty to defraywhatever expenses I may be put to, at the time which suits you best.And now I beg that you will lay before us everything that may help usin forming an opinion upon the matter."
"Alas!" replied our visitor, "the very horror of my situation lies inthe fact that my fears are so vague, and my suspicions depend soentirely upon small points, which might seem trivial to another, thateven he to whom of all others I have a right to look for help andadvice looks upon all that I tell him about it as the fancies of anervous woman. He does not say so, but I can read it from hissoothing answers and averted eyes. But I have heard, Mr. Holmes, thatyou can see deeply into the manifold wickedness of the human heart.You may advise me how to walk amid the dangers which encompass me."
"I am all attention, madam."
"My name is Helen Stoner, and I am living with my stepfather, who isthe last survivor of one of the oldest Saxon families in England, theRoylotts of Stoke Moran, on the western border of Surrey."
Holmes nodded his head. "The name is familiar to me," said he.
"The family was at one time among the richest in England, and theestates extended over the borders into Berkshire in the north, andHampshire in the west. In the last century, however, four successiveheirs were of a dissolute and wasteful disposition, and the familyruin was eventually completed by a gambler in the days of theRegency. Nothing was left save a few acres of ground, and thetwo-hundred-year-old house, which is itself crushed under a heavymortgage. The last squire dragged out his existence there, living thehorrible life of an aristocratic pauper; but his only son, mystepfather, seeing that he must adapt himself to the new conditions,obtained an advance from a relative, which enabled him to take amedical degree and went out to Calcutta, where, by his professionalskill and his force of character, he established a large practice. Ina fit of anger, however, caused by some robberies which had beenperpetrated in the house, he beat his native butler to death andnarrowly escaped a capital sentence. As it was, he suffered a longterm of imprisonment and afterwards returned to England a morose anddisappointed man.
"When Dr. Roylott was in India he married my mother, Mrs. Stoner, theyoung widow of Major-General Stoner, of the Bengal Artillery. Mysister Julia and I were twins, and we were only two years old at thetime of my mother's re-marriage. She had a considerable sum ofmoney--not less than 1000 a year--and this she bequeathed to Dr.Roylott entirely while we resided with him, with a provision that acertain annual sum should be allowed to each of us in the event ofour marriage. Shortly after our return to England my mother died--shewas killed eight years ago in a railway accident near Crewe. Dr.Roylott then abandoned his attempts to establish himself in practicein London and took us to live with him in the old ancestral house atStoke Moran. The money which my mother had left was enough for allour wants, and there seemed to be no obstacle to our happiness.
"But a terrible change came over our stepfather about this time.Instead of making friends and exchanging visits with our neighbours,who had at first been overjoyed to see a Roylott of Stoke Moran backin the old family seat, he shut himself up in his house and seldomcame out save to indulge in ferocious quarrels with whoever mightcross his path. Violence of temper approaching to mania has beenhereditary in the men of the family, and in my stepfather's case ithad, I believe, been intensified by his long residence in thetropics. A series of disgraceful brawls took place, two of whichended in the police-court, until at last he became the terror of thevillage, and the folks would fly at his approach, for he is a man ofimmense strength, and absolutely uncontrollable in his anger.
"Last week he hurled the local blacksmith over a parapet into astream, and it was only by paying over all the money which I couldgather together that I was able to avert another public exposure. Hehad no friends at all save the wandering gypsies, and he would givethese vagabonds leave to encamp upon the few acres of bramble-coveredland which represent the family estate, and would accept in returnthe hospitality of their tents, wandering away with them sometimesfor weeks on end. He has a passion also for Indian animals, which aresent over to him by a correspondent, and he has at this moment acheetah and a baboon, which wander freely over his grounds and arefeared by the villagers almost as much as their master.
"You can imagine from what I say that my poor sister Julia and I hadno great pleasure in our lives. No servant would stay with us, andfor a long time we did all the work of the house. She was but thirtyat the time of her death, and yet her hair had already begun towhiten, even as mine has."
"Your sister is dead, then?"
"She died just two years ago, and it is of her death that I wish tospeak to you. You can understand that, living the life which I havedescribed, we were little likely to see anyone of our own age andposition. We had, however, an aunt, my mother's maiden sister, MissHonoria Westphail, who lives near Harrow, and we were occasionallyallowed to pay short visits at this lady's house. Julia went there atChristmas two years ago, and met there a half-pay major of marines,to whom she became engaged. My stepfather learned of the engagementwhen my sister returned and offered no objection to the marriage; butwithin a fortnight of the day which had been fixed for the wedding,the terrible event occurred which has deprived me of my onlycompanion."
Sherlock Holmes had been leaning back in his chair with his eyesclosed and his head sunk in a cushion, but he half opened his lidsnow and glanced across at his visitor.
"Pray be precise as to details," said he.
"It is easy for me to be so, for every event of that dreadful time isseared into my memory. The manor-house is, as I have already said,very old, and only one wing is now inhabited. The bedrooms in thiswing are on the ground floor, the sitting-rooms being in the centralblock of the buildings. Of these bedrooms the first is Dr. Roylott's,the second my sister's, and the third my own. There is nocommunication between them, but they all open out into the samecorridor. Do I make myself plain?"
"Perfectly so."
"The windows of the three rooms open out upon the lawn. That fatalnight Dr. Roylott had gone to his room early, though we knew that hehad not retired to rest, for my sister was troubled by the smell ofthe strong Indian cigars which it was his custom to smoke. She lefther room, therefore, and came into mine, where she sat for some time,chatting about her approaching wedding. At eleven o'clock she rose toleave me, but she paused at the door and looked back.
"'Tell me, Helen,' said she, 'have you ever heard anyone whistle inthe dead of the night?'
"'Never,' said I.
"'I suppose that you could not possibly whistle, yourself, in yoursleep?'
"'Certainly not. But why?'
"'Because during the last few nights I have always, about three inthe morning, heard a low, clear whistle. I am a light sleeper, and ithas awakened me. I cannot tell where it came from--perhaps from thenext room, perhaps from the lawn. I thought that I would just ask youwhether you had heard it.'
"'No, I have not. It must be those wretched gipsies in theplantation.'
"'Very likely. And yet if it were on the lawn, I wonder that you didnot hear it also.'
"'Ah, but I sleep more heavily than you.'
"'Well, it is of no great consequence, at any rate.' She smiled backat me, closed my door, and a few moments later I heard her key turnin the lock."
"Indeed," said Holmes. "Was it your custom always to lock yourselvesin at night?"
"Always."
"And why?"
"I think that I mentioned to you that the doctor kept a cheetah and ababoon. We had no feeling of security unless our doors were locked."
"Quite so. Pray proceed with your statement."
"I could not sleep that night. A vague feeling of impendingmisfortune impressed me. My sister and I, you will recollect, weretwins, and you know how subtle are the links which bind two soulswhich are so closely allied. It was a wild night. The wind washowling outside, and the rain was beating and splashing against thewindows. Suddenly, amid all the hubbub of the gale, there burst forththe wild scream of a terrified woman. I knew that it was my sister'svoice. I sprang from my bed, wrapped a shawl round me, and rushedinto the corridor. As I opened my door I seemed to hear a lowwhistle, such as my sister described, and a few moments later aclanging sound, as if a mass of metal had fallen. As I ran down thepassage, my sister's door was unlocked, and revolved slowly upon itshinges. I stared at it horror-stricken, not knowing what was about toissue from it. By the light of the corridor-lamp I saw my sisterappear at the opening, her face blanched with terror, her handsgroping for help, her whole figure swaying to and fro like that of adrunkard. I ran to her and threw my arms round her, but at thatmoment her knees seemed to give way and she fell to the ground.  Shewrithed as one who is in terrible pain, and her limbs were dreadfullyconvulsed. At first I thought that she had not recognised me, but asI bent over her she suddenly shrieked out in a voice which I shallnever forget, 'Oh, my God! Helen! It was the band! The speckledband!' There was something else which she would fain have said, andshe stabbed with her finger into the air in the direction of thedoctor's room, but a fresh convulsion seized her and choked herwords. I rushed out, calling loudly for my stepfather, and I met himhastening from his room in his dressing-gown. When he reached mysister's side she was unconscious, and though he poured brandy downher throat and sent for medical aid from the village, all effortswere in vain, for she slowly sank and died without having recoveredher consciousness. Such was the dreadful end of my beloved sister."
"One moment," said Holmes, "are you sure about this whistle andmetallic sound? Could you swear to it?"
"That was what the county coroner asked me at the inquiry. It is mystrong impression that I heard it, and yet, among the crash of thegale and the creaking of an old house, I may possibly have beendeceived."
"Was your sister dressed?"
"No, she was in her night-dress. In her right hand was found thecharred stump of a match, and in her left a match-box."
"Showing that she had struck a light and looked about her when thealarm took place. That is important. And what conclusions did thecoroner come to?"
"He investigated the case with great care, for Dr. Roylott's conducthad long been notorious in the county, but he was unable to find anysatisfactory cause of death. My evidence showed that the door hadbeen fastened upon the inner side, and the windows were blocked byold-fashioned shutters with broad iron bars, which were secured everynight. The walls were carefully sounded, and were shown to be quitesolid all round, and the flooring was also thoroughly examined, withthe same result. The chimney is wide, but is barred up by four largestaples. It is certain, therefore, that my sister was quite alonewhen she met her end. Besides, there were no marks of any violenceupon her."
"How about poison?"
"The doctors examined her for it, but without success."
"What do you think that this unfortunate lady died of, then?"
"It is my belief that she died of pure fear and nervous shock, thoughwhat it was that frightened her I cannot imagine."
"Were there gipsies in the plantation at the time?"
"Yes, there are nearly always some there."
"Ah, and what did you gather from this allusion to a band--a speckledband?"
"Sometimes I have thought that it was merely the wild talk ofdelirium, sometimes that it may have referred to some band of people,perhaps to these very gipsies in the plantation. I do not knowwhether the spotted handkerchiefs which so many of them wear overtheir heads might have suggested the strange adjective which sheused."
Holmes shook his head like a man who is far from being satisfied.
"These are very deep waters," said he; "pray go on with yournarrative."
"Two years have passed since then, and my life has been until latelylonelier than ever. A month ago, however, a dear friend, whom I haveknown for many years, has done me the honour to ask my hand inmarriage. His name is Armitage--Percy Armitage--the second son of Mr.Armitage, of Crane Water, near Reading. My stepfather has offered noopposition to the match, and we are to be married in the course ofthe spring. Two days ago some repairs were started in the west wingof the building, and my bedroom wall has been pierced, so that I havehad to move into the chamber in which my sister died, and to sleep inthe very bed in which she slept. Imagine, then, my thrill of terrorwhen last night, as I lay awake, thinking over her terrible fate, Isuddenly heard in the silence of the night the low whistle which hadbeen the herald of her own death. I sprang up and lit the lamp, butnothing was to be seen in the room. I was too shaken to go to bedagain, however, so I dressed, and as soon as it was daylight Islipped down, got a dog-cart at the Crown Inn, which is opposite, anddrove to Leatherhead, from whence I have come on this morning withthe one object of seeing you and asking your advice."
"You have done wisely," said my friend. "But have you told me all?"
"Yes, all."
"Miss Roylott, you have not. You are screening your stepfather."
"Why, what do you mean?"
For answer Holmes pushed back the frill of black lace which fringedthe hand that lay upon our visitor's knee. Five little livid spots,the marks of four fingers and a thumb, were printed upon the whitewrist.
"You have been cruelly used," said Holmes.
The lady coloured deeply and covered over her injured wrist. "He is ahard man," she said, "and perhaps he hardly knows his own strength."
There was a long silence, during which Holmes leaned his chin uponhis hands and stared into the crackling fire.
"This is a very deep business," he said at last. "There are athousand details which I should desire to know before I decide uponour course of action. Yet we have not a moment to lose. If we were tocome to Stoke Moran to-day, would it be possible for us to see overthese rooms without the knowledge of your stepfather?"
"As it happens, he spoke of coming into town to-day upon some mostimportant business. It is probable that he will be away all day, andthat there would be nothing to disturb you. We have a housekeepernow, but she is old and foolish, and I could easily get her out ofthe way."
"Excellent. You are not averse to this trip, Watson?"
"By no means."
"Then we shall both come. What are you going to do yourself?"
"I have one or two things which I would wish to do now that I am intown. But I shall return by the twelve o'clock train, so as to bethere in time for your coming."
"And you may expect us early in the afternoon. I have myself somesmall business matters to attend to. Will you not wait andbreakfast?"
"No, I must go. My heart is lightened already since I have confidedmy trouble to you. I shall look forward to seeing you again thisafternoon." She dropped her thick black veil over her face and glidedfrom the room.
"And what do you think of it all, Watson?" asked Sherlock Holmes,leaning back in his chair.
"It seems to me to be a most dark and sinister business."
"Dark enough and sinister enough."
"Yet if the lady is correct in saying that the flooring and walls aresound, and that the door, window, and chimney are impassable, thenher sister must have been undoubtedly alone when she met hermysterious end."
"What becomes, then, of these nocturnal whistles, and what of thevery peculiar words of the dying woman?"
"I cannot think."
"When you combine the ideas of whistles at night, the presence of aband of gipsies who are on intimate terms with this old doctor, thefact that we have every reason to believe that the doctor has aninterest in preventing his stepdaughter's marriage, the dyingallusion to a band, and, finally, the fact that Miss Helen Stonerheard a metallic clang, which might have been caused by one of thosemetal bars that secured the shutters falling back into its place, Ithink that there is good ground to think that the mystery may becleared along those lines."
"But what, then, did the gipsies do?"
"I cannot imagine."
"I see many objections to any such theory."
"And so do I. It is precisely for that reason that we are going toStoke Moran this day. I want to see whether the objections are fatal,or if they may be explained away. But what in the name of the devil!"
The ejaculation had been drawn from my companion by the fact that ourdoor had been suddenly dashed open, and that a huge man had framedhimself in the aperture. His costume was a peculiar mixture of theprofessional and of the agricultural, having a black top-hat, a longfrock-coat, and a pair of high gaiters, with a hunting-crop swingingin his hand. So tall was he that his hat actually brushed the crossbar of the doorway, and his breadth seemed to span it across fromside to side. A large face, seared with a thousand wrinkles, burnedyellow with the sun, and marked with every evil passion, was turnedfrom one to the other of us, while his deep-set, bile-shot eyes, andhis high, thin, fleshless nose, gave him somewhat the resemblance toa fierce old bird of prey.
"Which of you is Holmes?" asked this apparition.
"My name, sir; but you have the advantage of me," said my companionquietly.
"I am Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of Stoke Moran."
"Indeed, Doctor," said Holmes blandly. "Pray take a seat."
"I will do nothing of the kind. My stepdaughter has been here. I havetraced her. What has she been saying to you?"
"It is a little cold for the time of the year," said Holmes.
"What has she been saying to you?" screamed the old man furiously.
"But I have heard that the crocuses promise well," continued mycompanion imperturbably.
"Ha! You put me off, do you?" said our new visitor, taking a stepforward and shaking his hunting-crop. "I know you, you scoundrel!  Ihave heard of you before. You are Holmes, the meddler."
My friend smiled.
"Holmes, the busybody!"
His smile broadened.
"Holmes, the Scotland Yard Jack-in-office!"
Holmes chuckled heartily. "Your conversation is most entertaining,"said he. "When you go out close the door, for there is a decideddraught."
"I will go when I have said my say. Don't you dare to meddle with myaffairs. I know that Miss Stoner has been here. I traced her! I am adangerous man to fall foul of! See here." He stepped swiftly forward,seized the poker, and bent it into a curve with his huge brown hands.
"See that you keep yourself out of my grip," he snarled, and hurlingthe twisted poker into the fireplace he strode out of the room.
"He seems a very amiable person," said Holmes, laughing. "I am notquite so bulky, but if he had remained I might have shown him that mygrip was not much more feeble than his own." As he spoke he picked upthe steel poker and, with a sudden effort, straightened it out again.
"Fancy his having the insolence to confound me with the officialdetective force! This incident gives zest to our investigation,however, and I only trust that our little friend will not suffer fromher imprudence in allowing this brute to trace her. And now, Watson,we shall order breakfast, and afterwards I shall walk down toDoctors' Commons, where I hope to get some data which may help us inthis matter."
It was nearly one o'clock when Sherlock Holmes returned from hisexcursion. He held in his hand a sheet of blue paper, scrawled overwith notes and figures.
"I have seen the will of the deceased wife," said he. "To determineits exact meaning I have been obliged to work out the present pricesof the investments with which it is concerned. The total income,which at the time of the wife's death was little short of 1100, isnow, through the fall in agricultural prices, not more than 750.Each daughter can claim an income of 250, in case of marriage. It isevident, therefore, that if both girls had married, this beauty wouldhave had a mere pittance, while even one of them would cripple him toa very serious extent. My morning's work has not been wasted, sinceit has proved that he has the very strongest motives for standing inthe way of anything of the sort. And now, Watson, this is too seriousfor dawdling, especially as the old man is aware that we areinteresting ourselves in his affairs; so if you are ready, we shallcall a cab and drive to Waterloo. I should be very much obliged ifyou would slip your revolver into your pocket. An Eley's No. 2 is anexcellent argument with gentlemen who can twist steel pokers intoknots. That and a tooth-brush are, I think, all that we need."
At Waterloo we were fortunate in catching a train for Leatherhead,where we hired a trap at the station inn and drove for four or fivemiles through the lovely Surrey lanes. It was a perfect day, with abright sun and a few fleecy clouds in the heavens. The trees andwayside hedges were just throwing out their first green shoots, andthe air was full of the pleasant smell of the moist earth. To me atleast there was a strange contrast between the sweet promise of thespring and this sinister quest upon which we were engaged. Mycompanion sat in the front of the trap, his arms folded, his hatpulled down over his eyes, and his chin sunk upon his breast, buriedin the deepest thought. Suddenly, however, he started, tapped me onthe shoulder, and pointed over the meadows.
"Look there!" said he.
A heavily timbered park stretched up in a gentle slope, thickeninginto a grove at the highest point. From amid the branches therejutted out the grey gables and high roof-tree of a very old mansion.
"Stoke Moran?" said he.
"Yes, sir, that be the house of Dr. Grimesby Roylott," remarked thedriver.
"There is some building going on there," said Holmes; "that is wherewe are going."
"There's the village," said the driver, pointing to a cluster ofroofs some distance to the left; "but if you want to get to thehouse, you'll find it shorter to get over this stile, and so by thefoot-path over the fields. There it is, where the lady is walking."
"And the lady, I fancy, is Miss Stoner," observed Holmes, shading hiseyes. "Yes, I think we had better do as you suggest."
We got off, paid our fare, and the trap rattled back on its way toLeatherhead.
"I thought it as well," said Holmes as we climbed the stile, "thatthis fellow should think we had come here as architects, or on somedefinite business. It may stop his gossip. Good-afternoon, MissStoner. You see that we have been as good as our word."
Our client of the morning had hurried forward to meet us with a facewhich spoke her joy. "I have been waiting so eagerly for you," shecried, shaking hands with us warmly. "All has turned out splendidly.Dr. Roylott has gone to town, and it is unlikely that he will be backbefore evening."
"We have had the pleasure of making the doctor's acquaintance," saidHolmes, and in a few words he sketched out what had occurred. MissStoner turned white to the lips as she listened.
"Good heavens!" she cried, "he has followed me, then."
"So it appears."
"He is so cunning that I never know when I am safe from him. Whatwill he say when he returns?"
"He must guard himself, for he may find that there is someone morecunning than himself upon his track. You must lock yourself up fromhim to-night. If he is violent, we shall take you away to your aunt'sat Harrow. Now, we must make the best use of our time, so kindly takeus at once to the rooms which we are to examine."
The building was of grey, lichen-blotched stone, with a high centralportion and two curving wings, like the claws of a crab, thrown outon each side. In one of these wings the windows were broken andblocked with wooden boards, while the roof was partly caved in, apicture of ruin. The central portion was in little better repair, butthe right-hand block was comparatively modern, and the blinds in thewindows, with the blue smoke curling up from the chimneys, showedthat this was where the family resided. Some scaffolding had beenerected against the end wall, and the stone-work had been brokeninto, but there were no signs of any workmen at the moment of ourvisit. Holmes walked slowly up and down the ill-trimmed lawn andexamined with deep attention the outsides of the windows.
"This, I take it, belongs to the room in which you used to sleep, thecentre one to your sister's, and the one next to the main building toDr. Roylott's chamber?"
"Exactly so. But I am now sleeping in the middle one."
"Pending the alterations, as I understand. By the way, there does notseem to be any very pressing need for repairs at that end wall."
"There were none. I believe that it was an excuse to move me from myroom."
"Ah! that is suggestive. Now, on the other side of this narrow wingruns the corridor from which these three rooms open. There arewindows in it, of course?"
"Yes, but very small ones. Too narrow for anyone to pass through."
"As you both locked your doors at night, your rooms wereunapproachable from that side. Now, would you have the kindness to gointo your room and bar your shutters?"
Miss Stoner did so, and Holmes, after a careful examination throughthe open window, endeavoured in every way to force the shutter open,but without success. There was no slit through which a knife could bepassed to raise the bar. Then with his lens he tested the hinges, butthey were of solid iron, built firmly into the massive masonry."Hum!" said he, scratching his chin in some perplexity, "my theorycertainly presents some difficulties. No one could pass theseshutters if they were bolted. Well, we shall see if the inside throwsany light upon the matter."
A small side door led into the whitewashed corridor from which thethree bedrooms opened. Holmes refused to examine the third chamber,so we passed at once to the second, that in which Miss Stoner was nowsleeping, and in which her sister had met with her fate. It was ahomely little room, with a low ceiling and a gaping fireplace, afterthe fashion of old country-houses. A brown chest of drawers stood inone corner, a narrow white-counterpaned bed in another, and adressing-table on the left-hand side of the window. These articles,with two small wicker-work chairs, made up all the furniture in theroom save for a square of Wilton carpet in the centre. The boardsround and the panelling of the walls were of brown, worm-eaten oak,so old and discoloured that it may have dated from the originalbuilding of the house. Holmes drew one of the chairs into a cornerand sat silent, while his eyes travelled round and round and up anddown, taking in every detail of the apartment.
"Where does that bell communicate with?" he asked at last pointing toa thick bell-rope which hung down beside the bed, the tassel actuallylying upon the pillow.
"It goes to the housekeeper's room."
"It looks newer than the other things?"
"Yes, it was only put there a couple of years ago."
"Your sister asked for it, I suppose?"
"No, I never heard of her using it. We used always to get what wewanted for ourselves."
"Indeed, it seemed unnecessary to put so nice a bell-pull there. Youwill excuse me for a few minutes while I satisfy myself as to thisfloor." He threw himself down upon his face with his lens in his handand crawled swiftly backward and forward, examining minutely thecracks between the boards. Then he did the same with the wood-workwith which the chamber was panelled. Finally he walked over to thebed and spent some time in staring at it and in running his eye upand down the wall. Finally he took the bell-rope in his hand and gaveit a brisk tug.
"Why, it's a dummy," said he.
"Won't it ring?"
"No, it is not even attached to a wire. This is very interesting. Youcan see now that it is fastened to a hook just above where the littleopening for the ventilator is."
"How very absurd! I never noticed that before."
"Very strange!" muttered Holmes, pulling at the rope. "There are oneor two very singular points about this room. For example, what a foola builder must be to open a ventilator into another room, when, withthe same trouble, he might have communicated with the outside air!"
"That is also quite modern," said the lady.
"Done about the same time as the bell-rope?" remarked Holmes.
"Yes, there were several little changes carried out about that time."
"They seem to have been of a most interesting character--dummybell-ropes, and ventilators which do not ventilate. With yourpermission, Miss Stoner, we shall now carry our researches into theinner apartment."
Dr. Grimesby Roylott's chamber was larger than that of hisstep-daughter, but was as plainly furnished. A camp-bed, a smallwooden shelf full of books, mostly of a technical character, anarmchair beside the bed, a plain wooden chair against the wall, around table, and a large iron safe were the principal things whichmet the eye. Holmes walked slowly round and examined each and all ofthem with the keenest interest.
"What's in here?" he asked, tapping the safe.
"My stepfather's business papers."
"Oh! you have seen inside, then?"
"Only once, some years ago. I remember that it was full of papers."
"There isn't a cat in it, for example?"
"No. What a strange idea!"
"Well, look at this!" He took up a small saucer of milk which stoodon the top of it.
"No; we don't keep a cat. But there is a cheetah and a baboon."
"Ah, yes, of course! Well, a cheetah is just a big cat, and yet asaucer of milk does not go very far in satisfying its wants, Idaresay. There is one point which I should wish to determine." Hesquatted down in front of the wooden chair and examined the seat ofit with the greatest attention.
"Thank you. That is quite settled," said he, rising and putting hislens in his pocket. "Hullo! Here is something interesting!"
The object which had caught his eye was a small dog lash hung on onecorner of the bed. The lash, however, was curled upon itself and tiedso as to make a loop of whipcord.
"What do you make of that, Watson?"
"It's a common enough lash. But I don't know why it should be tied."
"That is not quite so common, is it? Ah, me! it's a wicked world, andwhen a clever man turns his brains to crime it is the worst of all. Ithink that I have seen enough now, Miss Stoner, and with yourpermission we shall walk out upon the lawn."
I had never seen my friend's face so grim or his brow so dark as itwas when we turned from the scene of this investigation. We hadwalked several times up and down the lawn, neither Miss Stoner normyself liking to break in upon his thoughts before he roused himselffrom his reverie.
"It is very essential, Miss Stoner," said he, "that you shouldabsolutely follow my advice in every respect."
"I shall most certainly do so."
"The matter is too serious for any hesitation. Your life may dependupon your compliance."
"I assure you that I am in your hands."
"In the first place, both my friend and I must spend the night inyour room."
Both Miss Stoner and I gazed at him in astonishment.
"Yes, it must be so. Let me explain. I believe that that is thevillage inn over there?"
"Yes, that is the Crown."
"Very good. Your windows would be visible from there?"
"Certainly."
"You must confine yourself to your room, on pretence of a headache,when your stepfather comes back. Then when you hear him retire forthe night, you must open the shutters of your window, undo the hasp,put your lamp there as a signal to us, and then withdraw quietly witheverything which you are likely to want into the room which you usedto occupy. I have no doubt that, in spite of the repairs, you couldmanage there for one night."
"Oh, yes, easily."
"The rest you will leave in our hands."
"But what will you do?"
"We shall spend the night in your room, and we shall investigate thecause of this noise which has disturbed you."
"I believe, Mr. Holmes, that you have already made up your mind,"said Miss Stoner, laying her hand upon my companion's sleeve.
"Perhaps I have."
"Then, for pity's sake, tell me what was the cause of my sister'sdeath."
"I should prefer to have clearer proofs before I speak."
"You can at least tell me whether my own thought is correct, and ifshe died from some sudden fright."
"No, I do not think so. I think that there was probably some moretangible cause. And now, Miss Stoner, we must leave you for if Dr.Roylott returned and saw us our journey would be in vain.  Good-bye,and be brave, for if you will do what I have told you, you may restassured that we shall soon drive away the dangers that threaten you."
Sherlock Holmes and I had no difficulty in engaging a bedroom andsitting-room at the Crown Inn. They were on the upper floor, and fromour window we could command a view of the avenue gate, and of theinhabited wing of Stoke Moran Manor House. At dusk we saw Dr.Grimesby Roylott drive past, his huge form looming up beside thelittle figure of the lad who drove him. The boy had some slightdifficulty in undoing the heavy iron gates, and we heard the hoarseroar of the doctor's voice and saw the fury with which he shook hisclinched fists at him. The trap drove on, and a few minutes later wesaw a sudden light spring up among the trees as the lamp was lit inone of the sitting-rooms.
"Do you know, Watson," said Holmes as we sat together in thegathering darkness, "I have really some scruples as to taking youto-night. There is a distinct element of danger."
"Can I be of assistance?"
"Your presence might be invaluable."
"Then I shall certainly come."
"It is very kind of you."
"You speak of danger. You have evidently seen more in these roomsthan was visible to me."
"No, but I fancy that I may have deduced a little more. I imaginethat you saw all that I did."
"I saw nothing remarkable save the bell-rope, and what purpose thatcould answer I confess is more than I can imagine."
"You saw the ventilator, too?"
"Yes, but I do not think that it is such a very unusual thing to havea small opening between two rooms. It was so small that a rat couldhardly pass through."
"I knew that we should find a ventilator before ever we came to StokeMoran."
"My dear Holmes!"
"Oh, yes, I did. You remember in her statement she said that hersister could smell Dr. Roylott's cigar. Now, of course that suggestedat once that there must be a communication between the two rooms. Itcould only be a small one, or it would have been remarked upon at thecoroner's inquiry. I deduced a ventilator."
"But what harm can there be in that?"
"Well, there is at least a curious coincidence of dates. A ventilatoris made, a cord is hung, and a lady who sleeps in the bed dies. Doesnot that strike you?"
"I cannot as yet see any connection."
"Did you observe anything very peculiar about that bed?"
"No."
"It was clamped to the floor. Did you ever see a bed fastened likethat before?"
"I cannot say that I have."
"The lady could not move her bed. It must always be in the samerelative position to the ventilator and to the rope--or so we maycall it, since it was clearly never meant for a bell-pull."
"Holmes," I cried, "I seem to see dimly what you are hinting at. Weare only just in time to prevent some subtle and horrible crime."
"Subtle enough and horrible enough. When a doctor does go wrong he isthe first of criminals. He has nerve and he has knowledge. Palmer andPritchard were among the heads of their profession. This man strikeseven deeper, but I think, Watson, that we shall be able to strikedeeper still. But we shall have horrors enough before the night isover; for goodness' sake let us have a quiet pipe and turn our mindsfor a few hours to something more cheerful."
About nine o'clock the light among the trees was extinguished, andall was dark in the direction of the Manor House. Two hours passedslowly away, and then, suddenly, just at the stroke of eleven, asingle bright light shone out right in front of us.
"That is our signal," said Holmes, springing to his feet; "it comesfrom the middle window."
As we passed out he exchanged a few words with the landlord,explaining that we were going on a late visit to an acquaintance, andthat it was possible that we might spend the night there. A momentlater we were out on the dark road, a chill wind blowing in ourfaces, and one yellow light twinkling in front of us through thegloom to guide us on our sombre errand.
There was little difficulty in entering the grounds, for unrepairedbreaches gaped in the old park wall. Making our way among the trees,we reached the lawn, crossed it, and were about to enter through thewindow when out from a clump of laurel bushes there darted whatseemed to be a hideous and distorted child, who threw itself upon thegrass with writhing limbs and then ran swiftly across the lawn intothe darkness.
"My God!" I whispered; "did you see it?"
Holmes was for the moment as startled as I. His hand closed like avice upon my wrist in his agitation. Then he broke into a low laughand put his lips to my ear.
"It is a nice household," he murmured. "That is the baboon."
I had forgotten the strange pets which the doctor affected. There wasa cheetah, too; perhaps we might find it upon our shoulders at anymoment. I confess that I felt easier in my mind when, after followingHolmes' example and slipping off my shoes, I found myself inside thebedroom. My companion noiselessly closed the shutters, moved the lamponto the table, and cast his eyes round the room. All was as we hadseen it in the daytime. Then creeping up to me and making a trumpetof his hand, he whispered into my ear again so gently that it was allthat I could do to distinguish the words:
"The least sound would be fatal to our plans."
I nodded to show that I had heard.
"We must sit without light. He would see it through the ventilator."
I nodded again.
"Do not go asleep; your very life may depend upon it. Have yourpistol ready in case we should need it. I will sit on the side of thebed, and you in that chair."
I took out my revolver and laid it on the corner of the table.
Holmes had brought up a long thin cane, and this he placed upon thebed beside him. By it he laid the box of matches and the stump of acandle. Then he turned down the lamp, and we were left in darkness.
How shall I ever forget that dreadful vigil? I could not hear asound, not even the drawing of a breath, and yet I knew that mycompanion sat open-eyed, within a few feet of me, in the same stateof nervous tension in which I was myself. The shutters cut off theleast ray of light, and we waited in absolute darkness.
From outside came the occasional cry of a night-bird, and once at ourvery window a long drawn catlike whine, which told us that thecheetah was indeed at liberty. Far away we could hear the deep tonesof the parish clock, which boomed out every quarter of an hour. Howlong they seemed, those quarters! Twelve struck, and one and two andthree, and still we sat waiting silently for whatever might befall.
Suddenly there was the momentary gleam of a light up in the directionof the ventilator, which vanished immediately, but was succeeded by astrong smell of burning oil and heated metal. Someone in the nextroom had lit a dark-lantern. I heard a gentle sound of movement, andthen all was silent once more, though the smell grew stronger. Forhalf an hour I sat with straining ears. Then suddenly another soundbecame audible--a very gentle, soothing sound, like that of a smalljet of steam escaping continually from a kettle. The instant that weheard it, Holmes sprang from the bed, struck a match, and lashedfuriously with his cane at the bell-pull.
"You see it, Watson?" he yelled. "You see it?"
But I saw nothing. At the moment when Holmes struck the light I hearda low, clear whistle, but the sudden glare flashing into my wearyeyes made it impossible for me to tell what it was at which my friendlashed so savagely. I could, however, see that his face was deadlypale and filled with horror and loathing. He had ceased to strike andwas gazing up at the ventilator when suddenly there broke from thesilence of the night the most horrible cry to which I have everlistened. It swelled up louder and louder, a hoarse yell of pain andfear and anger all mingled in the one dreadful shriek. They say thataway down in the village, and even in the distant parsonage, that cryraised the sleepers from their beds. It struck cold to our hearts,and I stood gazing at Holmes, and he at me, until the last echoes ofit had died away into the silence from which it rose.
"What can it mean?" I gasped.
"It means that it is all over," Holmes answered. "And perhaps, afterall, it is for the best. Take your pistol, and we will enter Dr.Roylott's room."
With a grave face he lit the lamp and led the way down the corridor.Twice he struck at the chamber door without any reply from within.Then he turned the handle and entered, I at his heels, with thecocked pistol in my hand.
It was a singular sight which met our eyes. On the table stood adark-lantern with the shutter half open, throwing a brilliant beam oflight upon the iron safe, the door of which was ajar. Beside thistable, on the wooden chair, sat Dr. Grimesby Roylott clad in a longgrey dressing-gown, his bare ankles protruding beneath, and his feetthrust into red heelless Turkish slippers. Across his lap lay theshort stock with the long lash which we had noticed during the day.His chin was cocked upward and his eyes were fixed in a dreadful,rigid stare at the corner of the ceiling. Round his brow he had apeculiar yellow band, with brownish speckles, which seemed to bebound tightly round his head. As we entered he made neither sound normotion.
"The band! the speckled band!" whispered Holmes.
I took a step forward. In an instant his strange headgear began tomove, and there reared itself from among his hair the squatdiamond-shaped head and puffed neck of a loathsome serpent.
"It is a swamp adder!" cried Holmes; "the deadliest snake in India.He has died within ten seconds of being bitten. Violence does, intruth, recoil upon the violent, and the schemer falls into the pitwhich he digs for another. Let us thrust this creature back into itsden, and we can then remove Miss Stoner to some place of shelter andlet the county police know what has happened."
As he spoke he drew the dog-whip swiftly from the dead man's lap, andthrowing the noose round the reptile's neck he drew it from itshorrid perch and, carrying it at arm's length, threw it into the ironsafe, which he closed upon it.
Such are the true facts of the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott, ofStoke Moran. It is not necessary that I should prolong a narrativewhich has already run to too great a length by telling how we brokethe sad news to the terrified girl, how we conveyed her by themorning train to the care of her good aunt at Harrow, of how the slowprocess of official inquiry came to the conclusion that the doctormet his fate while indiscreetly playing with a dangerous pet. Thelittle which I had yet to learn of the case was told me by SherlockHolmes as we travelled back next day.
"I had," said he, "come to an entirely erroneous conclusion whichshows, my dear Watson, how dangerous it always is to reason frominsufficient data. The presence of the gipsies, and the use of theword 'band,' which was used by the poor girl, no doubt, to explainthe appearance which she had caught a hurried glimpse of by the lightof her match, were sufficient to put me upon an entirely wrong scent.I can only claim the merit that I instantly reconsidered my positionwhen, however, it became clear to me that whatever danger threatenedan occupant of the room could not come either from the window or thedoor. My attention was speedily drawn, as I have already remarked toyou, to this ventilator, and to the bell-rope which hung down to thebed. The discovery that this was a dummy, and that the bed wasclamped to the floor, instantly gave rise to the suspicion that therope was there as a bridge for something passing through the hole andcoming to the bed. The idea of a snake instantly occurred to me, andwhen I coupled it with my knowledge that the doctor was furnishedwith a supply of creatures from India, I felt that I was probably onthe right track. The idea of using a form of poison which could notpossibly be discovered by any chemical test was just such a one aswould occur to a clever and ruthless man who had had an Easterntraining. The rapidity with which such a poison would take effectwould also, from his point of view, be an advantage. It would be asharp-eyed coroner, indeed, who could distinguish the two little darkpunctures which would show where the poison fangs had done theirwork. Then I thought of the whistle. Of course he must recall thesnake before the morning light revealed it to the victim. He hadtrained it, probably by the use of the milk which we saw, to returnto him when summoned. He would put it through this ventilator at thehour that he thought best, with the certainty that it would crawldown the rope and land on the bed. It might or might not bite theoccupant, perhaps she might escape every night for a week, but sooneror later she must fall a victim.
"I had come to these conclusions before ever I had entered his room.An inspection of his chair showed me that he had been in the habit ofstanding on it, which of course would be necessary in order that heshould reach the ventilator. The sight of the safe, the saucer ofmilk, and the loop of whipcord were enough to finally dispel anydoubts which may have remained. The metallic clang heard by MissStoner was obviously caused by her stepfather hastily closing thedoor of his safe upon its terrible occupant. Having once made up mymind, you know the steps which I took in order to put the matter tothe proof. I heard the creature hiss as I have no doubt that you didalso, and I instantly lit the light and attacked it."
"With the result of driving it through the ventilator."
"And also with the result of causing it to turn upon its master atthe other side. Some of the blows of my cane came home and roused itssnakish temper, so that it flew upon the first person it saw. In thisway I am no doubt indirectly responsible for Dr. Grimesby Roylott'sdeath, and I cannot say that it is likely to weigh very heavily uponmy conscience."





                 THE ADVENTURE OF THE ENGINEER'S THUMB
Of all the problems which have been submitted to my friend, Mr.Sherlock Holmes, for solution during the years of our intimacy, therewere only two which I was the means of introducing to hisnotice--that of Mr. Hatherley's thumb, and that of ColonelWarburton's madness. Of these the latter may have afforded a finerfield for an acute and original observer, but the other was sostrange in its inception and so dramatic in its details that it maybe the more worthy of being placed upon record, even if it gave myfriend fewer openings for those deductive methods of reasoning bywhich he achieved such remarkable results. The story has, I believe,been told more than once in the newspapers, but, like all suchnarratives, its effect is much less striking when set forth en blocin a single half-column of print than when the facts slowly evolvebefore your own eyes, and the mystery clears gradually away as eachnew discovery furnishes a step which leads on to the complete truth.At the time the circumstances made a deep impression upon me, and thelapse of two years has hardly served to weaken the effect.
It was in the summer of '89, not long after my marriage, that theevents occurred which I am now about to summarise. I had returned tocivil practice and had finally abandoned Holmes in his Baker Streetrooms, although I continually visited him and occasionally evenpersuaded him to forgo his Bohemian habits so far as to come andvisit us. My practice had steadily increased, and as I happened tolive at no very great distance from Paddington Station, I got a fewpatients from among the officials. One of these, whom I had cured ofa painful and lingering disease, was never weary of advertising myvirtues and of endeavouring to send me on every sufferer over whom hemight have any influence.
One morning, at a little before seven o'clock, I was awakened by themaid tapping at the door to announce that two men had come fromPaddington and were waiting in the consulting-room. I dressedhurriedly, for I knew by experience that railway cases were seldomtrivial, and hastened downstairs. As I descended, my old ally, theguard, came out of the room and closed the door tightly behind him.
"I've got him here," he whispered, jerking his thumb over hisshoulder; "he's all right."
"What is it, then?" I asked, for his manner suggested that it wassome strange creature which he had caged up in my room.
"It's a new patient," he whispered. "I thought I'd bring him roundmyself; then he couldn't slip away. There he is, all safe and sound.I must go now, Doctor; I have my dooties, just the same as you." Andoff he went, this trusty tout, without even giving me time to thankhim.
I entered my consulting-room and found a gentleman seated by thetable. He was quietly dressed in a suit of heather tweed with a softcloth cap which he had laid down upon my books. Round one of hishands he had a handkerchief wrapped, which was mottled all over withbloodstains. He was young, not more than five-and-twenty, I shouldsay, with a strong, masculine face; but he was exceedingly pale andgave me the impression of a man who was suffering from some strongagitation, which it took all his strength of mind to control.
"I am sorry to knock you up so early, Doctor," said he, "but I havehad a very serious accident during the night. I came in by train thismorning, and on inquiring at Paddington as to where I might find adoctor, a worthy fellow very kindly escorted me here. I gave the maida card, but I see that she has left it upon the side-table."
I took it up and glanced at it. "Mr. Victor Hatherley, hydraulicengineer, 16A, Victoria Street (3rd floor)." That was the name,style, and abode of my morning visitor. "I regret that I have keptyou waiting," said I, sitting down in my library-chair. "You arefresh from a night journey, I understand, which is in itself amonotonous occupation."
"Oh, my night could not be called monotonous," said he, and laughed.He laughed very heartily, with a high, ringing note, leaning back inhis chair and shaking his sides. All my medical instincts rose upagainst that laugh.
"Stop it!" I cried; "pull yourself together!" and I poured out somewater from a caraffe.
It was useless, however. He was off in one of those hystericaloutbursts which come upon a strong nature when some great crisis isover and gone. Presently he came to himself once more, very weary andpale-looking.
"I have been making a fool of myself," he gasped.
"Not at all. Drink this." I dashed some brandy into the water, andthe colour began to come back to his bloodless cheeks.
"That's better!" said he. "And now, Doctor, perhaps you would kindlyattend to my thumb, or rather to the place where my thumb used tobe."
He unwound the handkerchief and held out his hand. It gave even myhardened nerves a shudder to look at it. There were four protrudingfingers and a horrid red, spongy surface where the thumb should havebeen. It had been hacked or torn right out from the roots.
"Good heavens!" I cried, "this is a terrible injury. It must havebled considerably."
"Yes, it did. I fainted when it was done, and I think that I musthave been senseless for a long time. When I came to I found that itwas still bleeding, so I tied one end of my handkerchief very tightlyround the wrist and braced it up with a twig."
"Excellent! You should have been a surgeon."
"It is a question of hydraulics, you see, and came within my ownprovince."
"This has been done," said I, examining the wound, "by a very heavyand sharp instrument."
"A thing like a cleaver," said he.
"An accident, I presume?"
"By no means."
"What! a murderous attack?"
"Very murderous indeed."
"You horrify me."
I sponged the wound, cleaned it, dressed it, and finally covered itover with cotton wadding and carbolised bandages. He lay back withoutwincing, though he bit his lip from time to time.
"How is that?" I asked when I had finished.
"Capital! Between your brandy and your bandage, I feel a new man. Iwas very weak, but I have had a good deal to go through."
"Perhaps you had better not speak of the matter. It is evidentlytrying to your nerves."
"Oh, no, not now. I shall have to tell my tale to the police; but,between ourselves, if it were not for the convincing evidence of thiswound of mine, I should be surprised if they believed my statement,for it is a very extraordinary one, and I have not much in the way ofproof with which to back it up; and, even if they believe me, theclues which I can give them are so vague that it is a questionwhether justice will be done."
"Ha!" cried I, "if it is anything in the nature of a problem whichyou desire to see solved, I should strongly recommend you to come tomy friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, before you go to the officialpolice."
"Oh, I have heard of that fellow," answered my visitor, "and I shouldbe very glad if he would take the matter up, though of course I mustuse the official police as well. Would you give me an introduction tohim?"
"I'll do better. I'll take you round to him myself."
"I should be immensely obliged to you."
"We'll call a cab and go together. We shall just be in time to have alittle breakfast with him. Do you feel equal to it?"
"Yes; I shall not feel easy until I have told my story."
"Then my servant will call a cab, and I shall be with you in aninstant." I rushed upstairs, explained the matter shortly to my wife,and in five minutes was inside a hansom, driving with my newacquaintance to Baker Street.
Sherlock Holmes was, as I expected, lounging about his sitting-roomin his dressing-gown, reading the agony column of The Times andsmoking his before-breakfast pipe, which was composed of all theplugs and dottles left from his smokes of the day before, allcarefully dried and collected on the corner of the mantelpiece. Hereceived us in his quietly genial fashion, ordered fresh rashers andeggs, and joined us in a hearty meal. When it was concluded hesettled our new acquaintance upon the sofa, placed a pillow beneathhis head, and laid a glass of brandy and water within his reach.
"It is easy to see that your experience has been no common one, Mr.Hatherley," said he. "Pray, lie down there and make yourselfabsolutely at home. Tell us what you can, but stop when you are tiredand keep up your strength with a little stimulant."
"Thank you," said my patient. "but I have felt another man since thedoctor bandaged me, and I think that your breakfast has completed thecure. I shall take up as little of your valuable time as possible, soI shall start at once upon my peculiar experiences."
Holmes sat in his big armchair with the weary, heavy-liddedexpression which veiled his keen and eager nature, while I satopposite to him, and we listened in silence to the strange storywhich our visitor detailed to us.
"You must know," said he, "that I am an orphan and a bachelor,residing alone in lodgings in London. By profession I am a hydraulicengineer, and I have had considerable experience of my work duringthe seven years that I was apprenticed to Venner & Matheson, thewell-known firm, of Greenwich. Two years ago, having served my time,and having also come into a fair sum of money through my poorfather's death, I determined to start in business for myself and tookprofessional chambers in Victoria Street.
"I suppose that everyone finds his first independent start inbusiness a dreary experience. To me it has been exceptionally so.During two years I have had three consultations and one small job,and that is absolutely all that my profession has brought me. Mygross takings amount to 27 10s. Every day, from nine in the morninguntil four in the afternoon, I waited in my little den, until at lastmy heart began to sink, and I came to believe that I should neverhave any practice at all.
"Yesterday, however, just as I was thinking of leaving the office, myclerk entered to say there was a gentleman waiting who wished to seeme upon business. He brought up a card, too, with the name of'Colonel Lysander Stark' engraved upon it. Close at his heels camethe colonel himself, a man rather over the middle size, but of anexceeding thinness. I do not think that I have ever seen so thin aman. His whole face sharpened away into nose and chin, and the skinof his cheeks was drawn quite tense over his outstanding bones. Yetthis emaciation seemed to be his natural habit, and due to nodisease, for his eye was bright, his step brisk, and his bearingassured. He was plainly but neatly dressed, and his age, I shouldjudge, would be nearer forty than thirty.
"'Mr. Hatherley?' said he, with something of a German accent. 'Youhave been recommended to me, Mr. Hatherley, as being a man who is notonly proficient in his profession but is also discreet and capable ofpreserving a secret.'
"I bowed, feeling as flattered as any young man would at such anaddress. 'May I ask who it was who gave me so good a character?' 
"'Well, perhaps it is better that I should not tell you that just atthis moment. I have it from the same source that you are both anorphan and a bachelor and are residing alone in London.'
"'That is quite correct,' I answered; 'but you will excuse me if Isay that I cannot see how all this bears upon my professionalqualifications. I understand that it was on a professional matterthat you wished to speak to me?'
"'Undoubtedly so. But you will find that all I say is really to thepoint. I have a professional commission for you, but absolute secrecyis quite essential--absolute secrecy, you understand, and of coursewe may expect that more from a man who is alone than from one wholives in the bosom of his family.'
"'If I promise to keep a secret,' said I, 'you may absolutely dependupon my doing so.'
"He looked very hard at me as I spoke, and it seemed to me that I hadnever seen so suspicious and questioning an eye.
"'Do you promise, then?' said he at last.
"'Yes, I promise.'
"'Absolute and complete silence before, during, and after? Noreference to the matter at all, either in word or writing?'
"'I have already given you my word.'
"'Very good.' He suddenly sprang up, and darting like lightningacross the room he flung open the door. The passage outside wasempty.
"'That's all right,' said he, coming back. 'I know that clerks aresometimes curious as to their master's affairs. Now we can talk insafety.' He drew up his chair very close to mine and began to stareat me again with the same questioning and thoughtful look.
"A feeling of repulsion, and of something akin to fear had begun torise within me at the strange antics of this fleshless man. Even mydread of losing a client could not restrain me from showing myimpatience.
"'I beg that you will state your business, sir,' said I; 'my time isof value.' Heaven forgive me for that last sentence, but the wordscame to my lips.
"'How would fifty guineas for a night's work suit you?' he asked.
"'Most admirably.'
"'I say a night's work, but an hour's would be nearer the mark. Isimply want your opinion about a hydraulic stamping machine which hasgot out of gear. If you show us what is wrong we shall soon set itright ourselves. What do you think of such a commission as that?'
"'The work appears to be light and the pay munificent.'
"'Precisely so. We shall want you to come to-night by the lasttrain.'
"'Where to?'
"'To Eyford, in Berkshire. It is a little place near the borders ofOxfordshire, and within seven miles of Reading. There is a train fromPaddington which would bring you there at about 11.15.'
"'Very good.'
"'I shall come down in a carriage to meet you.'
"'There is a drive, then?'
"'Yes, our little place is quite out in the country. It is a goodseven miles from Eyford Station.'
"'Then we can hardly get there before midnight. I suppose there wouldbe no chance of a train back. I should be compelled to stop thenight.'
"'Yes, we could easily give you a shake-down.'
"'That is very awkward. Could I not come at some more convenienthour?'
"'We have judged it best that you should come late. It is torecompense you for any inconvenience that we are paying to you, ayoung and unknown man, a fee which would buy an opinion from the veryheads of your profession. Still, of course, if you would like to drawout of the business, there is plenty of time to do so.'
"I thought of the fifty guineas, and of how very useful they would beto me. 'Not at all,' said I, 'I shall be very happy to accommodatemyself to your wishes. I should like, however, to understand a littlemore clearly what it is that you wish me to do.'
"'Quite so. It is very natural that the pledge of secrecy which wehave exacted from you should have aroused your curiosity. I have nowish to commit you to anything without your having it all laid beforeyou. I suppose that we are absolutely safe from eavesdroppers?'
"'Entirely.'
"'Then the matter stands thus. You are probably aware thatfuller's-earth is a valuable product, and that it is only found inone or two places in England?'
"'I have heard so.'
"'Some little time ago I bought a small place--a very smallplace--within ten miles of Reading. I was fortunate enough todiscover that there was a deposit of fuller's-earth in one of myfields. On examining it, however, I found that this deposit was acomparatively small one, and that it formed a link between two verymuch larger ones upon the right and left--both of them, however, inthe grounds of my neighbours. These good people were absolutelyignorant that their land contained that which was quite as valuableas a gold-mine. Naturally, it was to my interest to buy their landbefore they discovered its true value, but unfortunately I had nocapital by which I could do this. I took a few of my friends into thesecret, however, and they suggested that we should quietly andsecretly work our own little deposit and that in this way we shouldearn the money which would enable us to buy the neighbouring fields.This we have now been doing for some time, and in order to help us inour operations we erected a hydraulic press. This press, as I havealready explained, has got out of order, and we wish your advice uponthe subject. We guard our secret very jealously, however, and if itonce became known that we had hydraulic engineers coming to ourlittle house, it would soon rouse inquiry, and then, if the factscame out, it would be good-bye to any chance of getting these fieldsand carrying out our plans. That is why I have made you promise methat you will not tell a human being that you are going to Eyfordto-night. I hope that I make it all plain?'
"'I quite follow you,' said I. 'The only point which I could notquite understand was what use you could make of a hydraulic press inexcavating fuller's-earth, which, as I understand, is dug out likegravel from a pit.'
"'Ah!' said he carelessly, 'we have our own process. We compress theearth into bricks, so as to remove them without revealing what theyare. But that is a mere detail. I have taken you fully into myconfidence now, Mr. Hatherley, and I have shown you how I trust you.'He rose as he spoke. 'I shall expect you, then, at Eyford at 11.15.'
"'I shall certainly be there.'
"'And not a word to a soul.' He looked at me with a last long,questioning gaze, and then, pressing my hand in a cold, dank grasp,he hurried from the room.
"Well, when I came to think it all over in cool blood I was very muchastonished, as you may both think, at this sudden commission whichhad been intrusted to me. On the one hand, of course, I was glad, forthe fee was at least tenfold what I should have asked had I set aprice upon my own services, and it was possible that this order mightlead to other ones. On the other hand, the face and manner of mypatron had made an unpleasant impression upon me, and I could notthink that his explanation of the fuller's-earth was sufficient toexplain the necessity for my coming at midnight, and his extremeanxiety lest I should tell anyone of my errand. However, I threw allfears to the winds, ate a hearty supper, drove to Paddington, andstarted off, having obeyed to the letter the injunction as to holdingmy tongue.
"At Reading I had to change not only my carriage but my station.However, I was in time for the last train to Eyford, and I reachedthe little dim-lit station after eleven o'clock. I was the onlypassenger who got out there, and there was no one upon the platformsave a single sleepy porter with a lantern. As I passed out throughthe wicket gate, however, I found my acquaintance of the morningwaiting in the shadow upon the other side. Without a word he graspedmy arm and hurried me into a carriage, the door of which was standingopen. He drew up the windows on either side, tapped on the wood-work,and away we went as fast as the horse could go."
"One horse?" interjected Holmes.
"Yes, only one."
"Did you observe the colour?"
"Yes, I saw it by the side-lights when I was stepping into thecarriage. It was a chestnut."
"Tired-looking or fresh?"
"Oh, fresh and glossy."
"Thank you. I am sorry to have interrupted you. Pray continue yourmost interesting statement."
"Away we went then, and we drove for at least an hour. ColonelLysander Stark had said that it was only seven miles, but I shouldthink, from the rate that we seemed to go, and from the time that wetook, that it must have been nearer twelve. He sat at my side insilence all the time, and I was aware, more than once when I glancedin his direction, that he was looking at me with great intensity. Thecountry roads seem to be not very good in that part of the world, forwe lurched and jolted terribly. I tried to look out of the windows tosee something of where we were, but they were made of frosted glass,and I could make out nothing save the occasional bright blur of apassing light. Now and then I hazarded some remark to break themonotony of the journey, but the colonel answered only inmonosyllables, and the conversation soon flagged. At last, however,the bumping of the road was exchanged for the crisp smoothness of agravel-drive, and the carriage came to a stand. Colonel LysanderStark sprang out, and, as I followed after him, pulled me swiftlyinto a porch which gaped in front of us. We stepped, as it were,right out of the carriage and into the hall, so that I failed tocatch the most fleeting glance of the front of the house. The instantthat I had crossed the threshold the door slammed heavily behind us,and I heard faintly the rattle of the wheels as the carriage droveaway.
"It was pitch dark inside the house, and the colonel fumbled aboutlooking for matches and muttering under his breath. Suddenly a dooropened at the other end of the passage, and a long, golden bar oflight shot out in our direction. It grew broader, and a womanappeared with a lamp in her hand, which she held above her head,pushing her face forward and peering at us. I could see that she waspretty, and from the gloss with which the light shone upon her darkdress I knew that it was a rich material. She spoke a few words in aforeign tongue in a tone as though asking a question, and when mycompanion answered in a gruff monosyllable she gave such a start thatthe lamp nearly fell from her hand. Colonel Stark went up to her,whispered something in her ear, and then, pushing her back into theroom from whence she had come, he walked towards me again with thelamp in his hand.
"'Perhaps you will have the kindness to wait in this room for a fewminutes,' said he, throwing open another door. It was a quiet,little, plainly furnished room, with a round table in the centre, onwhich several German books were scattered. Colonel Stark laid downthe lamp on the top of a harmonium beside the door. 'I shall not keepyou waiting an instant,' said he, and vanished into the darkness.
"I glanced at the books upon the table, and in spite of my ignoranceof German I could see that two of them were treatises on science, theothers being volumes of poetry. Then I walked across to the window,hoping that I might catch some glimpse of the country-side, but anoak shutter, heavily barred, was folded across it. It was awonderfully silent house. There was an old clock ticking loudlysomewhere in the passage, but otherwise everything was deadly still.A vague feeling of uneasiness began to steal over me. Who were theseGerman people, and what were they doing living in this strange,out-of-the-way place? And where was the place? I was ten miles or sofrom Eyford, that was all I knew, but whether north, south, east, orwest I had no idea. For that matter, Reading, and possibly otherlarge towns, were within that radius, so the place might not be sosecluded, after all. Yet it was quite certain, from the absolutestillness, that we were in the country. I paced up and down the room,humming a tune under my breath to keep up my spirits and feeling thatI was thoroughly earning my fifty-guinea fee.
"Suddenly, without any preliminary sound in the midst of the utterstillness, the door of my room swung slowly open. The woman wasstanding in the aperture, the darkness of the hall behind her, theyellow light from my lamp beating upon her eager and beautiful face.I could see at a glance that she was sick with fear, and the sightsent a chill to my own heart. She held up one shaking finger to warnme to be silent, and she shot a few whispered words of broken Englishat me, her eyes glancing back, like those of a frightened horse, intothe gloom behind her.
"'I would go,' said she, trying hard, as it seemed to me, to speakcalmly; 'I would go. I should not stay here. There is no good for youto do.'
"'But, madam,' said I, 'I have not yet done what I came for. I cannotpossibly leave until I have seen the machine.'
"'It is not worth your while to wait,' she went on. 'You can passthrough the door; no one hinders.' And then, seeing that I smiled andshook my head, she suddenly threw aside her constraint and made astep forward, with her hands wrung together. 'For the love ofHeaven!' she whispered, 'get away from here before it is too late!'
"But I am somewhat headstrong by nature, and the more ready to engagein an affair when there is some obstacle in the way. I thought of myfifty-guinea fee, of my wearisome journey, and of the unpleasantnight which seemed to be before me. Was it all to go for nothing? Whyshould I slink away without having carried out my commission, andwithout the payment which was my due? This woman might, for all Iknew, be a monomaniac. With a stout bearing, therefore, though hermanner had shaken me more than I cared to confess, I still shook myhead and declared my intention of remaining where I was. She wasabout to renew her entreaties when a door slammed overhead, and thesound of several footsteps was heard upon the stairs. She listenedfor an instant, threw up her hands with a despairing gesture, andvanished as suddenly and as noiselessly as she had come.
"The newcomers were Colonel Lysander Stark and a short thick man witha chinchilla beard growing out of the creases of his double chin, whowas introduced to me as Mr. Ferguson.
"'This is my secretary and manager,' said the colonel. 'By the way, Iwas under the impression that I left this door shut just now. I fearthat you have felt the draught.'
"'On the contrary,' said I, 'I opened the door myself because I feltthe room to be a little close.'
"He shot one of his suspicious looks at me. 'Perhaps we had betterproceed to business, then,' said he. 'Mr. Ferguson and I will takeyou up to see the machine.'
"'I had better put my hat on, I suppose.'
"'Oh, no, it is in the house.'
"'What, you dig fuller's-earth in the house?'
"'No, no. This is only where we compress it. But never mind that. Allwe wish you to do is to examine the machine and to let us know whatis wrong with it.'
"We went upstairs together, the colonel first with the lamp, the fatmanager and I behind him. It was a labyrinth of an old house, withcorridors, passages, narrow winding staircases, and little low doors,the thresholds of which were hollowed out by the generations who hadcrossed them. There were no carpets and no signs of any furnitureabove the ground floor, while the plaster was peeling off the walls,and the damp was breaking through in green, unhealthy blotches. Itried to put on as unconcerned an air as possible, but I had notforgotten the warnings of the lady, even though I disregarded them,and I kept a keen eye upon my two companions. Ferguson appeared to bea morose and silent man, but I could see from the little that he saidthat he was at least a fellow-countryman.
"Colonel Lysander Stark stopped at last before a low door, which heunlocked. Within was a small, square room, in which the three of uscould hardly get at one time. Ferguson remained outside, and thecolonel ushered me in.
"'We are now,' said he, 'actually within the hydraulic press, and itwould be a particularly unpleasant thing for us if anyone were toturn it on. The ceiling of this small chamber is really the end ofthe descending piston, and it comes down with the force of many tonsupon this metal floor. There are small lateral columns of wateroutside which receive the force, and which transmit and multiply itin the manner which is familiar to you. The machine goes readilyenough, but there is some stiffness in the working of it, and it haslost a little of its force. Perhaps you will have the goodness tolook it over and to show us how we can set it right.'
"I took the lamp from him, and I examined the machine verythoroughly. It was indeed a gigantic one, and capable of exercisingenormous pressure. When I passed outside, however, and pressed downthe levers which controlled it, I knew at once by the whishing soundthat there was a slight leakage, which allowed a regurgitation ofwater through one of the side cylinders. An examination showed thatone of the india-rubber bands which was round the head of adriving-rod had shrunk so as not quite to fill the socket along whichit worked. This was clearly the cause of the loss of power, and Ipointed it out to my companions, who followed my remarks verycarefully and asked several practical questions as to how they shouldproceed to set it right. When I had made it clear to them, I returnedto the main chamber of the machine and took a good look at it tosatisfy my own curiosity. It was obvious at a glance that the storyof the fuller's-earth was the merest fabrication, for it would beabsurd to suppose that so powerful an engine could be designed for soinadequate a purpose. The walls were of wood, but the floor consistedof a large iron trough, and when I came to examine it I could see acrust of metallic deposit all over it. I had stooped and was scrapingat this to see exactly what it was when I heard a mutteredexclamation in German and saw the cadaverous face of the colonellooking down at me.
"'What are you doing there?' he asked.
"I felt angry at having been tricked by so elaborate a story as thatwhich he had told me. 'I was admiring your fuller's-earth,' said I;'I think that I should be better able to advise you as to yourmachine if I knew what the exact purpose was for which it was used.'
"The instant that I uttered the words I regretted the rashness of myspeech. His face set hard, and a baleful light sprang up in his greyeyes.
"'Very well,' said he, 'you shall know all about the machine.' Hetook a step backward, slammed the little door, and turned the key inthe lock. I rushed towards it and pulled at the handle, but it wasquite secure, and did not give in the least to my kicks and shoves.'Hullo!' I yelled. 'Hullo! Colonel! Let me out!'
"And then suddenly in the silence I heard a sound which sent my heartinto my mouth. It was the clank of the levers and the swish of theleaking cylinder. He had set the engine at work. The lamp still stoodupon the floor where I had placed it when examining the trough. Byits light I saw that the black ceiling was coming down upon me,slowly, jerkily, but, as none knew better than myself, with a forcewhich must within a minute grind me to a shapeless pulp. I threwmyself, screaming, against the door, and dragged with my nails at thelock. I implored the colonel to let me out, but the remorselessclanking of the levers drowned my cries. The ceiling was only a footor two above my head, and with my hand upraised I could feel itshard, rough surface. Then it flashed through my mind that the pain ofmy death would depend very much upon the position in which I met it.If I lay on my face the weight would come upon my spine, and Ishuddered to think of that dreadful snap. Easier the other way,perhaps; and yet, had I the nerve to lie and look up at that deadlyblack shadow wavering down upon me? Already I was unable to standerect, when my eye caught something which brought a gush of hope backto my heart.
"I have said that though the floor and ceiling were of iron, thewalls were of wood. As I gave a last hurried glance around, I saw athin line of yellow light between two of the boards, which broadenedand broadened as a small panel was pushed backward. For an instant Icould hardly believe that here was indeed a door which led away fromdeath. The next instant I threw myself through, and lay half-faintingupon the other side. The panel had closed again behind me, but thecrash of the lamp, and a few moments afterwards the clang of the twoslabs of metal, told me how narrow had been my escape.
"I was recalled to myself by a frantic plucking at my wrist, and Ifound myself lying upon the stone floor of a narrow corridor, while awoman bent over me and tugged at me with her left hand, while sheheld a candle in her right. It was the same good friend whose warningI had so foolishly rejected.
"'Come! come!' she cried breathlessly. 'They will be here in amoment. They will see that you are not there. Oh, do not waste theso-precious time, but come!'
"This time, at least, I did not scorn her advice. I staggered to myfeet and ran with her along the corridor and down a winding stair.The latter led to another broad passage, and just as we reached it weheard the sound of running feet and the shouting of two voices, oneanswering the other from the floor on which  we were and from the onebeneath. My guide stopped and looked about her like one  who is ather wit's end. Then she threw open a door which led into a bedroom,through the window of which the moon was shining brightly.
"'It is your only chance,' said she. 'It is high, but it may be thatyou can jump it.'
"As she spoke a light sprang into view at the further end of thepassage, and I saw the lean figure of Colonel Lysander Stark rushingforward with a lantern in one hand and a weapon like a butcher'scleaver in the other. I rushed across the bedroom, flung open thewindow, and looked out. How quiet and sweet and wholesome the gardenlooked in the moonlight, and it could not be more than thirty feetdown. I clambered out upon the sill, but I hesitated to jump until Ishould have heard what passed between my saviour and the ruffian whopursued me. If she were ill-used, then at any risks I was determinedto go back to her assistance. The thought had hardly flashed throughmy mind before he was at the door, pushing his way past her; but shethrew her arms round him and tried to hold him back.
"'Fritz! Fritz!' she cried in English, 'remember your promise afterthe last time. You said it should not be again. He will be silent!Oh, he will be silent!'
"'You are mad, Elise!' he shouted, struggling to break away from her.'You will be the ruin of us. He has seen too much. Let me pass, Isay!' He dashed her to one side, and, rushing to the window, cut atme with his heavy weapon. I had let myself go, and was hanging by thehands to the sill, when his blow fell. I was conscious of a dullpain, my grip loosened, and I fell into the garden below.
"I was shaken but not hurt by the fall; so I picked myself up andrushed off among the bushes as hard as I could run, for I understoodthat I was far from being out of danger yet. Suddenly, however, as Iran, a deadly dizziness and sickness came over me. I glanced down atmy hand, which was throbbing painfully, and then, for the first time,saw that my thumb had been cut off and that the blood was pouringfrom my wound. I endeavoured to tie my handkerchief round it, butthere came a sudden buzzing in my ears, and next moment I fell in adead faint among the rose-bushes.
"How long I remained unconscious I cannot tell. It must have been avery long time, for the moon had sunk, and a bright morning wasbreaking when I came to myself. My clothes were all sodden with dew,and my coat-sleeve was drenched with blood from my wounded thumb. Thesmarting of it recalled in an instant all the particulars of mynight's adventure, and I sprang to my feet with the feeling that Imight hardly yet be safe from my pursuers. But to my astonishment,when I came to look round me, neither house nor garden were to beseen. I had been lying in an angle of the hedge close by thehighroad, and just a little lower down was a long building, whichproved, upon my approaching it, to be the very station at which I hadarrived upon the previous night. Were it not for the ugly wound uponmy hand, all that had passed during those dreadful hours might havebeen an evil dream.
"Half dazed, I went into the station and asked about the morningtrain. There would be one to Reading in less than an hour. The sameporter was on duty, I found, as had been there when I arrived. Iinquired of him whether he had ever heard of Colonel Lysander Stark.The name was strange to him. Had he observed a carriage the nightbefore waiting for me? No, he had not. Was there a police-stationanywhere near? There was one about three miles off.
"It was too far for me to go, weak and ill as I was. I determined towait until I got back to town before telling my story to the police.It was a little past six when I arrived, so I went first to have mywound dressed, and then the doctor was kind enough to bring me alonghere. I put the case into your hands and shall do exactly what youadvise."
We both sat in silence for some little time after listening to thisextraordinary narrative. Then Sherlock Holmes pulled down from theshelf one of the ponderous commonplace books in which he placed hiscuttings.
"Here is an advertisement which will interest you," said he. "Itappeared in all the papers about a year ago. Listen to this:
"'Lost, on the 9th inst., Mr. Jeremiah Hayling, aged twenty-six, ahydraulic engineer. Left his lodgings at ten o'clock at night, andhas not been heard of since. Was dressed in--'
etc., etc. Ha! That represents the last time that the colonel neededto have his machine overhauled, I fancy."
"Good heavens!" cried my patient. "Then that explains what the girlsaid."
"Undoubtedly. It is quite clear that the colonel was a cool anddesperate man, who was absolutely determined that nothing shouldstand in the way of his little game, like those out-and-out pirateswho will leave no survivor from a captured ship. Well, every momentnow is precious, so if you feel equal to it we shall go down toScotland Yard at once as a preliminary to starting for Eyford."
Some three hours or so afterwards we were all in the train together,bound from Reading to the little Berkshire village. There wereSherlock Holmes, the hydraulic engineer, Inspector Bradstreet, ofScotland Yard, a plain-clothes man, and myself. Bradstreet had spreadan ordnance map of the county out upon the seat and was busy with hiscompasses drawing a circle with Eyford for its centre.
"There you are," said he. "That circle is drawn at a radius of tenmiles from the village. The place we want must be somewhere near thatline. You said ten miles, I think, sir."
"It was an hour's good drive."
"And you think that they brought you back all that way when you wereunconscious?"
"They must have done so. I have a confused memory, too, of havingbeen lifted and conveyed somewhere."
"What I cannot understand," said I, "is why they should have sparedyou when they found you lying fainting in the garden. Perhaps thevillain was softened by the woman's entreaties."
"I hardly think that likely. I never saw a more inexorable face in mylife."
"Oh, we shall soon clear up all that," said Bradstreet. "Well, I havedrawn my circle, and I only wish I knew at what point upon it thefolk that we are in search of are to be found."
"I think I could lay my finger on it," said Holmes quietly.
"Really, now!" cried the inspector, "you have formed your opinion!Come, now, we shall see who agrees with you. I say it is south, forthe country is more deserted there."
"And I say east," said my patient.
"I am for west," remarked the plain-clothes man. "There are severalquiet little villages up there."
"And I am for north," said I, "because there are no hills there, andour friend says that he did not notice the carriage go up any."
"Come," cried the inspector, laughing; "it's a very pretty diversityof opinion. We have boxed the compass among us. Who do you give yourcasting vote to?"
"You are all wrong."
"But we can't all be."
"Oh, yes, you can. This is my point." He placed his finger in thecentre of the circle. "This is where we shall find them."
"But the twelve-mile drive?" gasped Hatherley.
"Six out and six back. Nothing simpler. You say yourself that thehorse was fresh and glossy when you got in. How could it be that ifit had gone twelve miles over heavy roads?"
"Indeed, it is a likely ruse enough," observed Bradstreetthoughtfully. "Of course there can be no doubt as to the nature ofthis gang."
"None at all," said Holmes. "They are coiners on a large scale, andhave used the machine to form the amalgam which has taken the placeof silver."
"We have known for some time that a clever gang was at work," saidthe inspector. "They have been turning out half-crowns by thethousand. We even traced them as far as Reading, but could get nofarther, for they had covered their traces in a way that showed thatthey were very old hands. But now, thanks to this lucky chance, Ithink that we have got them right enough."
But the inspector was mistaken, for those criminals were not destinedto fall into the hands of justice. As we rolled into Eyford Stationwe saw a gigantic column of smoke which streamed up from behind asmall clump of trees in the neighbourhood and hung like an immenseostrich feather over the landscape.
"A house on fire?" asked Bradstreet as the train steamed off again onits way.
"Yes, sir!" said the station-master.
"When did it break out?"
"I hear that it was during the night, sir, but it has got worse, andthe whole place is in a blaze."
"Whose house is it?"
"Dr. Becher's."
"Tell me," broke in the engineer, "is Dr. Becher a German, very thin,with a long, sharp nose?"
The station-master laughed heartily. "No, sir, Dr. Becher is anEnglishman, and there isn't a man in the parish who has abetter-lined waistcoat. But he has a gentleman staying with him, apatient, as I understand, who is a foreigner, and he looks as if alittle good Berkshire beef would do him no harm."
The station-master had not finished his speech before we were allhastening in the direction of the fire. The road topped a low hill,and there was a great widespread whitewashed building in front of us,spouting fire at every chink and window, while in the garden in frontthree fire-engines were vainly striving to keep the flames under.
"That's it!" cried Hatherley, in intense excitement. "There is thegravel-drive, and there are the rose-bushes where I lay. That secondwindow is the one that I jumped from."
"Well, at least," said Holmes, "you have had your revenge upon them.There can be no question that it was your oil-lamp which, when it wascrushed in the press, set fire to the wooden walls, though no doubtthey were too excited in the chase after you to observe it at thetime. Now keep your eyes open in this crowd for your friends of lastnight, though I very much fear that they are a good hundred miles offby now."
And Holmes' fears came to be realised, for from that day to this noword has ever been heard either of the beautiful woman, the sinisterGerman, or the morose Englishman. Early that morning a peasant hadmet a cart containing several people and some very bulky boxesdriving rapidly in the direction of Reading, but there all traces ofthe fugitives disappeared, and even Holmes' ingenuity failed ever todiscover the least clue as to their whereabouts.
The firemen had been much perturbed at the strange arrangements whichthey had found within, and still more so by discovering a newlysevered human thumb upon a window-sill of the second floor. Aboutsunset, however, their efforts were at last successful, and theysubdued the flames, but not before the roof had fallen in, and thewhole place been reduced to such absolute ruin that, save sometwisted cylinders and iron piping, not a trace remained of themachinery which had cost our unfortunate acquaintance so dearly.Large masses of nickel and of tin were discovered stored in anout-house, but no coins were to be found, which may have explainedthe presence of those bulky boxes which have been already referredto.
How our hydraulic engineer had been conveyed from the garden to thespot where he recovered his senses might have remained forever amystery were it not for the soft mould, which told us a very plaintale. He had evidently been carried down by two persons, one of whomhad remarkably small feet and the other unusually large ones. On thewhole, it was most probable that the silent Englishman, being lessbold or less murderous than his companion, had assisted the woman tobear the unconscious man out of the way of danger.
"Well," said our engineer ruefully as we took our seats to returnonce more to London, "it has been a pretty business for me! I havelost my thumb and I have lost a fifty-guinea fee, and what have Igained?"
"Experience," said Holmes, laughing. "Indirectly it may be of value,you know; you have only to put it into words to gain the reputationof being excellent company for the remainder of your existence."





                  THE ADVENTURE OF THE NOBLE BACHELOR
The Lord St. Simon marriage, and its curious termination, have longceased to be a subject of interest in those exalted circles in whichthe unfortunate bridegroom moves. Fresh scandals have eclipsed it,and their more piquant details have drawn the gossips away from thisfour-year-old drama. As I have reason to believe, however, that thefull facts have never been revealed to the general public, and as myfriend Sherlock Holmes had a considerable share in clearing thematter up, I feel that no memoir of him would be complete withoutsome little sketch of this remarkable episode.
It was a few weeks before my own marriage, during the days when I wasstill sharing rooms with Holmes in Baker Street, that he came homefrom an afternoon stroll to find a letter on the table waiting forhim. I had remained indoors all day, for the weather had taken asudden turn to rain, with high autumnal winds, and the Jezail bulletwhich I had brought back in one of my limbs as a relic of my Afghancampaign throbbed with dull persistence. With my body in oneeasy-chair and my legs upon another, I had surrounded myself with acloud of newspapers until at last, saturated with the news of theday, I tossed them all aside and lay listless, watching the hugecrest and monogram upon the envelope upon the table and wonderinglazily who my friend's noble correspondent could be.
"Here is a very fashionable epistle," I remarked as he entered. "Yourmorning letters, if I remember right, were from a fish-monger and atide-waiter."
"Yes, my correspondence has certainly the charm of variety," heanswered, smiling, "and the humbler are usually the more interesting.This looks like one of those unwelcome social summonses which callupon a man either to be bored or to lie."
He broke the seal and glanced over the contents.
"Oh, come, it may prove to be something of interest, after all."
"Not social, then?"
"No, distinctly professional."
"And from a noble client?"
"One of the highest in England."
"My dear fellow, I congratulate you."
"I assure you, Watson, without affectation, that the status of myclient is a matter of less moment to me than the interest of hiscase. It is just possible, however, that that also may not be wantingin this new investigation. You have been reading the papersdiligently of late, have you not?"
"It looks like it," said I ruefully, pointing to a huge bundle in thecorner. "I have had nothing else to do."
"It is fortunate, for you will perhaps be able to post me up. I readnothing except the criminal news and the agony column. The latter isalways instructive. But if you have followed recent events so closelyyou must have read about Lord St. Simon and his wedding?"
"Oh, yes, with the deepest interest."
"That is well. The letter which I hold in my hand is from Lord St.Simon. I will read it to you, and in return you must turn over thesepapers and let me have whatever bears upon the matter. This is whathe says:
"'My dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes:"'Lord Backwater tells me that I may place implicit reliance uponyour judgment and discretion. I have determined, therefore, to callupon you and to consult you in reference to the very painful eventwhich has occurred in connection with my wedding. Mr. Lestrade, ofScotland Yard, is acting already in the matter, but he assures methat he sees no objection to your co-operation, and that he eventhinks that it might be of some assistance. I will call at fouro'clock in the afternoon, and, should you have any other engagementat that time, I hope that you will postpone it, as this matter is ofparamount importance."'Yours faithfully,"'St. Simon.'
"It is dated from Grosvenor Mansions, written with a quill pen, andthe noble lord has had the misfortune to get a smear of ink upon theouter side of his right little finger," remarked Holmes as he foldedup the epistle.
"He says four o'clock. It is three now. He will be here in an hour."
"Then I have just time, with your assistance, to get clear upon thesubject. Turn over those papers and arrange the extracts in theirorder of time, while I take a glance as to who our client is." Hepicked a red-covered volume from a line of books of reference besidethe mantelpiece. "Here he is," said he, sitting down and flatteningit out upon his knee. "'Lord Robert Walsingham de Vere St. Simon,second son of the Duke of Balmoral.' Hum! 'Arms: Azure, threecaltrops in chief over a fess sable. Born in 1846.' He's forty-oneyears of age, which is mature for marriage. Was Under-Secretary forthe colonies in a late administration. The Duke, his father, was atone time Secretary for Foreign Affairs. They inherit Plantagenetblood by direct descent, and Tudor on the distaff side. Ha! Well,there is nothing very instructive in all this. I think that I mustturn to you Watson, for something more solid."
"I have very little difficulty in finding what I want," said I, "forthe facts are quite recent, and the matter struck me as remarkable. Ifeared to refer them to you, however, as I knew that you had aninquiry on hand and that you disliked the intrusion of othermatters."
"Oh, you mean the little problem of the Grosvenor Square furniturevan. That is quite cleared up now--though, indeed, it was obviousfrom the first. Pray give me the results of your newspaperselections."
"Here is the first notice which I can find. It is in the personalcolumn of the Morning Post, and dates, as you see, some weeks back:
"'A marriage has been arranged [it says] and will, if rumour iscorrect, very shortly take place, between Lord Robert St. Simon,second son of the Duke of Balmoral, and Miss Hatty Doran, the onlydaughter of Aloysius Doran. Esq., of San Francisco, Cal., U.S.A.'
That is all."
"Terse and to the point," remarked Holmes, stretching his long, thinlegs towards the fire.
"There was a paragraph amplifying this in one of the society papersof the same week. Ah, here it is:
"'There will soon be a call for protection in the marriage market,for the present free-trade principle appears to tell heavily againstour home product. One by one the management of the noble houses ofGreat Britain is passing into the hands of our fair cousins fromacross the Atlantic. An important addition has been made during thelast week to the list of the prizes which have been borne away bythese charming invaders. Lord St. Simon, who has shown himself forover twenty years proof against the little god's arrows, has nowdefinitely announced his approaching marriage with Miss Hatty Doran,the fascinating daughter of a California millionaire. Miss Doran,whose graceful figure and striking face attracted much attention atthe Westbury House festivities, is an only child, and it is currentlyreported that her dowry will run to considerably over the sixfigures, with expectancies for the future. As it is an open secretthat the Duke of Balmoral has been compelled to sell his pictureswithin the last few years, and as Lord St. Simon has no property ofhis own save the small estate of Birchmoor, it is obvious that theCalifornian heiress is not the only gainer by an alliance which willenable her to make the easy and common transition from a Republicanlady to a British peeress.'"
"Anything else?" asked Holmes, yawning.
"Oh, yes; plenty. Then there is another note in the Morning Post tosay that the marriage would be an absolutely quiet one, that it wouldbe at St. George's, Hanover Square, that only half a dozen intimatefriends would be invited, and that the party would return to thefurnished house at Lancaster Gate which has been taken by Mr.Aloysius Doran. Two days later--that is, on Wednesday last--there isa curt announcement that the wedding had taken place, and that thehoneymoon would be passed at Lord Backwater's place, nearPetersfield. Those are all the notices which appeared before thedisappearance of the bride."
"Before the what?" asked Holmes with a start.
"The vanishing of the lady."
"When did she vanish, then?"
"At the wedding breakfast."
"Indeed. This is more interesting than it promised to be; quitedramatic, in fact."
"Yes; it struck me as being a little out of the common."
"They often vanish before the ceremony, and occasionally during thehoneymoon; but I cannot call to mind anything quite so prompt asthis. Pray let me have the details."
"I warn you that they are very incomplete."
"Perhaps we may make them less so."
"Such as they are, they are set forth in a single article of amorning paper of yesterday, which I will read to you. It is headed,'Singular Occurrence at a Fashionable Wedding':
"'The family of Lord Robert St. Simon has been thrown into thegreatest consternation by the strange and painful episodes which havetaken place in connection with his wedding. The ceremony, as shortlyannounced in the papers of yesterday, occurred on the previousmorning; but it is only now that it has been possible to confirm thestrange rumours which have been so persistently floating about. Inspite of the attempts of the friends to hush the matter up, so muchpublic attention has now been drawn to it that no good purpose can beserved by affecting to disregard what is a common subject forconversation."'The ceremony, which was performed at St. George's, Hanover Square,was a very quiet one, no one being present save the father of thebride, Mr. Aloysius Doran, the Duchess of Balmoral, Lord Backwater,Lord Eustace and Lady Clara St. Simon (the younger brother and sisterof the bridegroom), and Lady Alicia Whittington. The whole partyproceeded afterwards to the house of Mr. Aloysius Doran, at LancasterGate, where breakfast had been prepared. It appears that some littletrouble was caused by a woman, whose name has not been ascertained,who endeavoured to force her way into the house after the bridalparty, alleging that she had some claim upon Lord St. Simon. It wasonly after a painful and prolonged scene that she was ejected by thebutler and the footman. The bride, who had fortunately entered thehouse before this unpleasant interruption, had sat down to breakfastwith the rest, when she complained of a sudden indisposition andretired to her room. Her prolonged absence having caused somecomment, her father followed her, but learned from her maid that shehad only come up to her chamber for an instant, caught up an ulsterand bonnet, and hurried down to the passage. One of the footmendeclared that he had seen a lady leave the house thus apparelled, buthad refused to credit that it was his mistress, believing her to bewith the company. On ascertaining that his daughter had disappeared,Mr. Aloysius Doran, in conjunction with the bridegroom, instantly putthemselves in communication with the police, and very energeticinquiries are being made, which will probably result in a speedyclearing up of this very singular business. Up to a late hour lastnight, however, nothing had transpired as to the whereabouts of themissing lady. There are rumours of foul play in the matter, and it issaid that the police have caused the arrest of the woman who hadcaused the original disturbance, in the belief that, from jealousy orsome other motive, she may have been concerned in the strangedisappearance of the bride.'"
"And is that all?"
"Only one little item in another of the morning papers, but it is asuggestive one."
"And it is--"
"That Miss Flora Millar, the lady who had caused the disturbance, hasactually been arrested. It appears that she was formerly a danseuseat the Allegro, and that she has known the bridegroom for some years.There are no further particulars, and the whole case is in your handsnow--so far as it has been set forth in the public press."
"And an exceedingly interesting case it appears to be. I would nothave missed it for worlds. But there is a ring at the bell, Watson,and as the clock makes it a few minutes after four, I have no doubtthat this will prove to be our noble client. Do not dream of going,Watson, for I very much prefer having a witness, if only as a checkto my own memory."
"Lord Robert St. Simon," announced our page-boy, throwing open thedoor. A gentleman entered, with a pleasant, cultured face, high-nosedand pale, with something perhaps of petulance about the mouth, andwith the steady, well-opened eye of a man whose pleasant lot it hadever been to command and to be obeyed. His manner was brisk, and yethis general appearance gave an undue impression of age, for he had aslight forward stoop and a little bend of the knees as he walked. Hishair, too, as he swept off his very curly-brimmed hat, was grizzledround the edges and thin upon the top. As to his dress, it wascareful to the verge of foppishness, with high collar, blackfrock-coat, white waistcoat, yellow gloves, patent-leather shoes, andlight-coloured gaiters. He advanced slowly into the room, turning hishead from left to right, and swinging in his right hand the cordwhich held his golden eyeglasses.
"Good-day, Lord St. Simon," said Holmes, rising and bowing. "Praytake the basket-chair. This is my friend and colleague, Dr. Watson.Draw up a little to the fire, and we will talk this matter over."
"A most painful matter to me, as you can most readily imagine, Mr.Holmes. I have been cut to the quick. I understand that you havealready managed several delicate cases of this sort, sir, though Ipresume that they were hardly from the same class of society."
"No, I am descending."
"I beg pardon."
"My last client of the sort was a king."
"Oh, really! I had no idea. And which king?"
"The King of Scandinavia."
"What! Had he lost his wife?"
"You can understand," said Holmes suavely, "that I extend to theaffairs of my other clients the same secrecy which I promise to youin yours."
"Of course! Very right! very right! I'm sure I beg pardon. As to myown case, I am ready to give you any information which may assist youin forming an opinion."
"Thank you. I have already learned all that is in the public prints,nothing more. I presume that I may take it as correct--this article,for example, as to the disappearance of the bride."
Lord St. Simon glanced over it. "Yes, it is correct, as far as itgoes."
"But it needs a great deal of supplementing before anyone could offeran opinion. I think that I may arrive at my facts most directly byquestioning you."
"Pray do so."
"When did you first meet Miss Hatty Doran?"
"In San Francisco, a year ago."
"You were travelling in the States?"
"Yes."
"Did you become engaged then?"
"No."
"But you were on a friendly footing?"
"I was amused by her society, and she could see that I was amused."
"Her father is very rich?"
"He is said to be the richest man on the Pacific slope."
"And how did he make his money?"
"In mining. He had nothing a few years ago. Then he struck gold,invested it, and came up by leaps and bounds."
"Now, what is your own impression as to the young lady's--your wife'scharacter?"
The nobleman swung his glasses a little faster and stared down intothe fire. "You see, Mr. Holmes," said he, "my wife was twenty beforeher father became a rich man. During that time she ran free in amining camp and wandered through woods or mountains, so that hereducation has come from Nature rather than from the schoolmaster. Sheis what we call in England a tomboy, with a strong nature, wild andfree, unfettered by any sort of traditions. She isimpetuous--volcanic, I was about to say. She is swift in making upher mind and fearless in carrying out her resolutions. On the otherhand, I would not have given her the name which I have the honour tobear"--he gave a little stately cough--"had not I thought her to beat bottom a noble woman. I believe that she is capable of heroicself-sacrifice and that anything dishonourable would be repugnant toher."
"Have you her photograph?"
"I brought this with me." He opened a locket and showed us the fullface of a very lovely woman. It was not a photograph but an ivoryminiature, and the artist had brought out the full effect of thelustrous black hair, the large dark eyes, and the exquisite mouth.Holmes gazed long and earnestly at it. Then he closed the locket andhanded it back to Lord St. Simon.
"The young lady came to London, then, and you renewed youracquaintance?"
"Yes, her father brought her over for this last London season. I mether several times, became engaged to her, and have now married her."
"She brought, I understand, a considerable dowry?"
"A fair dowry. Not more than is usual in my family."
"And this, of course, remains to you, since the marriage is a faitaccompli?"
"I really have made no inquiries on the subject."
"Very naturally not. Did you see Miss Doran on the day before thewedding?"
"Yes."
"Was she in good spirits?"
"Never better. She kept talking of what we should do in our futurelives."
"Indeed! That is very interesting. And on the morning of thewedding?"
"She was as bright as possible--at least until after the ceremony."
"And did you observe any change in her then?"
"Well, to tell the truth, I saw then the first signs that I had everseen that her temper was just a little sharp. The incident however,was too trivial to relate and can have no possible bearing upon thecase."
"Pray let us have it, for all that."
"Oh, it is childish. She dropped her bouquet as we went towards thevestry. She was passing the front pew at the time, and it fell overinto the pew. There was a moment's delay, but the gentleman in thepew handed it up to her again, and it did not appear to be the worsefor the fall. Yet when I spoke to her of the matter, she answered meabruptly; and in the carriage, on our way home, she seemed absurdlyagitated over this trifling cause."
"Indeed! You say that there was a gentleman in the pew. Some of thegeneral public were present, then?"
"Oh, yes. It is impossible to exclude them when the church is open."
"This gentleman was not one of your wife's friends?"
"No, no; I call him a gentleman by courtesy, but he was quite acommon-looking person. I hardly noticed his appearance. But really Ithink that we are wandering rather far from the point."
"Lady St. Simon, then, returned from the wedding in a less cheerfulframe of mind than she had gone to it. What did she do on re-enteringher father's house?"
"I saw her in conversation with her maid."
"And who is her maid?"
"Alice is her name. She is an American and came from California withher."
"A confidential servant?"
"A little too much so. It seemed to me that her mistress allowed herto take great liberties. Still, of course, in America they look uponthese things in a different way."
"How long did she speak to this Alice?"
"Oh, a few minutes. I had something else to think of."
"You did not overhear what they said?"
"Lady St. Simon said something about 'jumping a claim.' She wasaccustomed to use slang of the kind. I have no idea what she meant."
"American slang is very expressive sometimes. And what did your wifedo when she finished speaking to her maid?"
"She walked into the breakfast-room."
"On your arm?"
"No, alone. She was very independent in little matters like that.Then, after we had sat down for ten minutes or so, she rosehurriedly, muttered some words of apology, and left the room. Shenever came back."
"But this maid, Alice, as I understand, deposes that she went to herroom, covered her bride's dress with a long ulster, put on a bonnet,and went out."
"Quite so. And she was afterwards seen walking into Hyde Park incompany with Flora Millar, a woman who is now in custody, and who hadalready made a disturbance at Mr. Doran's house that morning."
"Ah, yes. I should like a few particulars as to this young lady, andyour relations to her."
Lord St. Simon shrugged his shoulders and raised his eyebrows. "Wehave been on a friendly footing for some years--I may say on a veryfriendly footing. She used to be at the Allegro. I have not treatedher ungenerously, and she had no just cause of complaint against me,but you know what women are, Mr. Holmes. Flora was a dear littlething, but exceedingly hot-headed and devotedly attached to me. Shewrote me dreadful letters when she heard that I was about to bemarried, and, to tell the truth, the reason why I had the marriagecelebrated so quietly was that I feared lest there might be a scandalin the church. She came to Mr. Doran's door just after we returned,and she endeavoured to push her way in, uttering very abusiveexpressions towards my wife, and even threatening her, but I hadforeseen the possibility of something of the sort, and I had twopolice fellows there in private clothes, who soon pushed her outagain. She was quiet when she saw that there was no good in making arow."
"Did your wife hear all this?"
"No, thank goodness, she did not."
"And she was seen walking with this very woman afterwards?"
"Yes. That is what Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, looks upon as soserious. It is thought that Flora decoyed my wife out and laid someterrible trap for her."
"Well, it is a possible supposition."
"You think so, too?"
"I did not say a probable one. But you do not yourself look upon thisas likely?"
"I do not think Flora would hurt a fly."
"Still, jealousy is a strange transformer of characters. Pray what isyour own theory as to what took place?"
"Well, really, I came to seek a theory, not to propound one. I havegiven you all the facts. Since you ask me, however, I may say that ithas occurred to me as possible that the excitement of this affair,the consciousness that she had made so immense a social stride, hadthe effect of causing some little nervous disturbance in my wife."
"In short, that she had become suddenly deranged?"
"Well, really, when I consider that she has turned her back--I willnot say upon me, but upon so much that many have aspired to withoutsuccess--I can hardly explain it in any other fashion."
"Well, certainly that is also a conceivable hypothesis," said Holmes,smiling. "And now, Lord St. Simon, I think that I have nearly all mydata. May I ask whether you were seated at the breakfast-table sothat you could see out of the window?"
"We could see the other side of the road and the Park."
"Quite so. Then I do not think that I need to detain you longer. Ishall communicate with you."
"Should you be fortunate enough to solve this problem," said ourclient, rising.
"I have solved it."
"Eh? What was that?"
"I say that I have solved it."
"Where, then, is my wife?"
"That is a detail which I shall speedily supply."
Lord St. Simon shook his head. "I am afraid that it will take wiserheads than yours or mine," he remarked, and bowing in a stately,old-fashioned manner he departed.
"It is very good of Lord St. Simon to honour my head by putting it ona level with his own," said Sherlock Holmes, laughing. "I think thatI shall have a whisky and soda and a cigar after all thiscross-questioning. I had formed my conclusions as to the case beforeour client came into the room."
"My dear Holmes!"
"I have notes of several similar cases, though none, as I remarkedbefore, which were quite as prompt. My whole examination served toturn my conjecture into a certainty. Circumstantial evidence isoccasionally very convincing, as when you find a trout in the milk,to quote Thoreau's example."
"But I have heard all that you have heard."
"Without, however, the knowledge of pre-existing cases which servesme so well. There was a parallel instance in Aberdeen some yearsback, and something on very much the same lines at Munich the yearafter the Franco-Prussian War. It is one of these cases--but, hullo,here is Lestrade! Good-afternoon, Lestrade! You will find an extratumbler upon the sideboard, and there are cigars in the box."
The official detective was attired in a pea-jacket and cravat, whichgave him a decidedly nautical appearance, and he carried a blackcanvas bag in his hand. With a short greeting he seated himself andlit the cigar which had been offered to him.
"What's up, then?" asked Holmes with a twinkle in his eye. "You lookdissatisfied."
"And I feel dissatisfied. It is this infernal St. Simon marriagecase. I can make neither head nor tail of the business."
"Really! You surprise me."
"Who ever heard of such a mixed affair? Every clue seems to slipthrough my fingers. I have been at work upon it all day."
"And very wet it seems to have made you," said Holmes laying his handupon the arm of the pea-jacket.
"Yes, I have been dragging the Serpentine."
"In heaven's name, what for?"
"In search of the body of Lady St. Simon."
Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his chair and laughed heartily.
"Have you dragged the basin of Trafalgar Square fountain?" he asked.
"Why? What do you mean?"
"Because you have just as good a chance of finding this lady in theone as in the other."
Lestrade shot an angry glance at my companion. "I suppose you knowall about it," he snarled.
"Well, I have only just heard the facts, but my mind is made up."
"Oh, indeed! Then you think that the Serpentine plays no part in thematter?"
"I think it very unlikely."
"Then perhaps you will kindly explain how it is that we found this init?" He opened his bag as he spoke, and tumbled onto the floor awedding-dress of watered silk, a pair of white satin shoes and abride's wreath and veil, all discoloured and soaked in water."There," said he, putting a new wedding-ring upon the top of thepile. "There is a little nut for you to crack, Master Holmes."
"Oh, indeed!" said my friend, blowing blue rings into the air.  "Youdragged them from the Serpentine?"
"No. They were found floating near the margin by a park-keeper. Theyhave been identified as her clothes, and it seemed to me that if theclothes were there the body would not be far off."
"By the same brilliant reasoning, every man's body is to be found inthe neighbourhood of his wardrobe. And pray what did you hope toarrive at through this?"
"At some evidence implicating Flora Millar in the disappearance."
"I am afraid that you will find it difficult."
"Are you, indeed, now?" cried Lestrade with some bitterness. "I amafraid, Holmes, that you are not very practical with your deductionsand your inferences. You have made two blunders in as many minutes.This dress does implicate Miss Flora Millar."
"And how?"
"In the dress is a pocket. In the pocket is a card-case. In thecard-case is a note. And here is the very note." He slapped it downupon the table in front of him. "Listen to this:
"'You will see me when all is ready. Come at once."'F.H.M.'
Now my theory all along has been that Lady St. Simon was decoyed awayby Flora Millar, and that she, with confederates, no doubt, wasresponsible for her disappearance. Here, signed with her initials, isthe very note which was no doubt quietly slipped into her hand at thedoor and which lured her within their reach."
"Very good, Lestrade," said Holmes, laughing. "You really are veryfine indeed. Let me see it." He took up the paper in a listless way,but his attention instantly became riveted, and he gave a little cryof satisfaction. "This is indeed important," said he.
"Ha! you find it so?"
"Extremely so. I congratulate you warmly."
Lestrade rose in his triumph and bent his head to look. "Why," heshrieked, "you're looking at the wrong side!"
"On the contrary, this is the right side."
"The right side? You're mad! Here is the note written in pencil overhere."
"And over here is what appears to be the fragment of a hotel bill,which interests me deeply."
"There's nothing in it. I looked at it before," said Lestrade.
"'Oct. 4th, rooms 8s., breakfast 2s. 6d., cocktail 1s., lunch 2s.6d., glass sherry, 8d.' I see nothing in that."
"Very likely not. It is most important, all the same. As to the note,it is important also, or at least the initials are, so I congratulateyou again."
"I've wasted time enough," said Lestrade, rising. "I believe in hardwork and not in sitting by the fire spinning fine theories. Good-day,Mr. Holmes, and we shall see which gets to the bottom of the matterfirst." He gathered up the garments, thrust them into the bag, andmade for the door.
"Just one hint to you, Lestrade," drawled Holmes before his rivalvanished; "I will tell you the true solution of the matter. Lady St.Simon is a myth. There is not, and there never has been, any suchperson."
Lestrade looked sadly at my companion. Then he turned to me, tappedhis forehead three times, shook his head solemnly, and hurried away.
He had hardly shut the door behind him when Holmes rose to put on hisovercoat. "There is something in what the fellow says about outdoorwork," he remarked, "so I think, Watson, that I must leave you toyour papers for a little."
It was after five o'clock when Sherlock Holmes left me, but I had notime to be lonely, for within an hour there arrived a confectioner'sman with a very large flat box. This he unpacked with the help of ayouth whom he had brought with him, and presently, to my very greatastonishment, a quite epicurean little cold supper began to be laidout upon our humble lodging-house mahogany. There were a couple ofbrace of cold woodcock, a pheasant, a pt de foie gras pie with agroup of ancient and cobwebby bottles. Having laid out all theseluxuries, my two visitors vanished away, like the genii of theArabian Nights, with no explanation save that the things had beenpaid for and were ordered to this address.
Just before nine o'clock Sherlock Holmes stepped briskly into theroom. His features were gravely set, but there was a light in his eyewhich made me think that he had not been disappointed in hisconclusions.
"They have laid the supper, then," he said, rubbing his hands.
"You seem to expect company. They have laid for five."
"Yes, I fancy we may have some company dropping in," said he. "I amsurprised that Lord St. Simon has not already arrived. Ha! I fancythat I hear his step now upon the stairs."
It was indeed our visitor of the afternoon who came bustling in,dangling his glasses more vigorously than ever, and with a veryperturbed expression upon his aristocratic features.
"My messenger reached you, then?" asked Holmes.
"Yes, and I confess that the contents startled me beyond measure.Have you good authority for what you say?" 
"The best possible."
Lord St. Simon sank into a chair and passed his hand over hisforehead.
"What will the Duke say," he murmured, "when he hears that one of thefamily has been subjected to such humiliation?"
"It is the purest accident. I cannot allow that there is anyhumiliation."
"Ah, you look on these things from another standpoint."
"I fail to see that anyone is to blame. I can hardly see how the ladycould have acted otherwise, though her abrupt method of doing it wasundoubtedly to be regretted. Having no mother, she had no one toadvise her at such a crisis."
"It was a slight, sir, a public slight," said Lord St. Simon, tappinghis fingers upon the table.
"You must make allowance for this poor girl, placed in sounprecedented a position."
"I will make no allowance. I am very angry indeed, and I have beenshamefully used."
"I think that I heard a ring," said Holmes. "Yes, there are steps onthe landing. If I cannot persuade you to take a lenient view of thematter, Lord St. Simon, I have brought an advocate here who may bemore successful." He opened the door and ushered in a lady andgentleman. "Lord St. Simon," said he "allow me to introduce you toMr. and Mrs. Francis Hay Moulton. The lady, I think, you have alreadymet."
At the sight of these newcomers our client had sprung from his seatand stood very erect, with his eyes cast down and his hand thrustinto the breast of his frock-coat, a picture of offended dignity. Thelady had taken a quick step forward and had held out her hand to him,but he still refused to raise his eyes. It was as well for hisresolution, perhaps, for her pleading face was one which it was hardto resist.
"You're angry, Robert," said she. "Well, I guess you have every causeto be."
"Pray make no apology to me," said Lord St. Simon bitterly.
"Oh, yes, I know that I have treated you real bad and that I shouldhave spoken to you before I went; but I was kind of rattled, and fromthe time when I saw Frank here again I just didn't know what I wasdoing or saying. I only wonder I didn't fall down and do a faintright there before the altar."
"Perhaps, Mrs. Moulton, you would like my friend and me to leave theroom while you explain this matter?"
"If I may give an opinion," remarked the strange gentleman, "we'vehad just a little too much secrecy over this business already. For mypart, I should like all Europe and America to hear the rights of it."He was a small, wiry, sunburnt man, clean-shaven, with a sharp faceand alert manner.
"Then I'll tell our story right away," said the lady. "Frank here andI met in '84, in McQuire's camp, near the Rockies, where pa wasworking a claim. We were engaged to each other, Frank and I; but thenone day father struck a rich pocket and made a pile, while poor Frankhere had a claim that petered out and came to nothing. The richer pagrew the poorer was Frank; so at last pa wouldn't hear of ourengagement lasting any longer, and he took me away to 'Frisco. Frankwouldn't throw up his hand, though; so he followed me there, and hesaw me without pa knowing anything about it. It would only have madehim mad to know, so we just fixed it all up for ourselves. Frank saidthat he would go and make his pile, too, and never come back to claimme until he had as much as pa. So then I promised to wait for him tothe end of time and pledged myself not to marry anyone else while helived. 'Why shouldn't we be married right away, then,' said he, 'andthen I will feel sure of you; and I won't claim to be your husbanduntil I come back?' Well, we talked it over, and he had fixed it allup so nicely, with a clergyman all ready in waiting, that we just didit right there; and then Frank went off to seek his fortune, and Iwent back to pa.
"The next I heard of Frank was that he was in Montana, and then hewent prospecting in Arizona, and then I heard of him from New Mexico.After that came a long newspaper story about how a miners' camp hadbeen attacked by Apache Indians, and there was my Frank's name amongthe killed. I fainted dead away, and I was very sick for monthsafter. Pa thought I had a decline and took me to half the doctors in'Frisco. Not a word of news came for a year and more, so that I neverdoubted that Frank was really dead. Then Lord St. Simon came to'Frisco, and we came to London, and a marriage was arranged, and pawas very pleased, but I felt all the time that no man on this earthwould ever take the place in my heart that had been given to my poorFrank.
"Still, if I had married Lord St. Simon, of course I'd have done myduty by him. We can't command our love, but we can our actions. Iwent to the altar with him with the intention to make him just asgood a wife as it was in me to be. But you may imagine what I feltwhen, just as I came to the altar rails, I glanced back and saw Frankstanding and looking at me out of the first pew. I thought it was hisghost at first; but when I looked again there he was still, with akind of question in his eyes, as if to ask me whether I were glad orsorry to see him. I wonder I didn't drop. I know that everything wasturning round, and the words of the clergyman were just like the buzzof a bee in my ear. I didn't know what to do. Should I stop theservice and make a scene in the church? I glanced at him again, andhe seemed to know what I was thinking, for he raised his finger tohis lips to tell me to be still. Then I saw him scribble on a pieceof paper, and I knew that he was writing me a note. As I passed hispew on the way out I dropped my bouquet over to him, and he slippedthe note into my hand when he returned me the flowers. It was only aline asking me to join him when he made the sign to me to do so. Ofcourse I never doubted for a moment that my first duty was now tohim, and I determined to do just whatever he might direct.
"When I got back I told my maid, who had known him in California, andhad always been his friend. I ordered her to say nothing, but to geta few things packed and my ulster ready. I know I ought to havespoken to Lord St. Simon, but it was dreadful hard before his motherand all those great people. I just made up my mind to run away andexplain afterwards. I hadn't been at the table ten minutes before Isaw Frank out of the window at the other side of the road. Hebeckoned to me and then began walking into the Park. I slipped out,put on my things, and followed him. Some woman came talking somethingor other about Lord St. Simon to me--seemed to me from the little Iheard as if he had a little secret of his own before marriagealso--but I managed to get away from her and soon overtook Frank. Wegot into a cab together, and away we drove to some lodgings he hadtaken in Gordon Square, and that was my true wedding after all thoseyears of waiting. Frank had been a prisoner among the Apaches, hadescaped, came on to 'Frisco, found that I had given him up for deadand had gone to England, followed me there, and had come upon me atlast on the very morning of my second wedding."
"I saw it in a paper," explained the American. "It gave the name andthe church but not where the lady lived."
"Then we had a talk as to what we should do, and Frank was all foropenness, but I was so ashamed of it all that I felt as if I shouldlike to vanish away and never see any of them again--just sending aline to pa, perhaps, to show him that I was alive. It was awful to meto think of all those lords and ladies sitting round thatbreakfast-table and waiting for me to come back. So Frank took mywedding-clothes and things and made a bundle of them, so that Ishould not be traced, and dropped them away somewhere where no onecould find them. It is likely that we should have gone on to Paristo-morrow, only that this good gentleman, Mr. Holmes, came round tous this evening, though how he found us is more than I can think, andhe showed us very clearly and kindly that I was wrong and that Frankwas right, and that we should be putting ourselves in the wrong if wewere so secret. Then he offered to give us a chance of talking toLord St. Simon alone, and so we came right away round to his rooms atonce. Now, Robert, you have heard it all, and I am very sorry if Ihave given you pain, and I hope that you do not think very meanly ofme."
Lord St. Simon had by no means relaxed his rigid attitude, but hadlistened with a frowning brow and a compressed lip to this longnarrative.
"Excuse me," he said, "but it is not my custom to discuss my mostintimate personal affairs in this public manner."
"Then you won't forgive me? You won't shake hands before I go?"
"Oh, certainly, if it would give you any pleasure." He put out hishand and coldly grasped that which she extended to him.
"I had hoped," suggested Holmes, "that you would have joined us in afriendly supper."
"I think that there you ask a little too much," responded hisLordship. "I may be forced to acquiesce in these recent developments,but I can hardly be expected to make merry over them. I think thatwith your permission I will now wish you all a very good-night." Heincluded us all in a sweeping bow and stalked out of the room.
"Then I trust that you at least will honour me with your company,"said Sherlock Holmes. "It is always a joy to meet an American, Mr.Moulton, for I am one of those who believe that the folly of amonarch and the blundering of a minister in far-gone years will notprevent our children from being some day citizens of the sameworld-wide country under a flag which shall be a quartering of theUnion Jack with the Stars and Stripes."
"The case has been an interesting one," remarked Holmes when ourvisitors had left us, "because it serves to show very clearly howsimple the explanation may be of an affair which at first sight seemsto be almost inexplicable. Nothing could be more natural than thesequence of events as narrated by this lady, and nothing strangerthan the result when viewed, for instance, by Mr. Lestrade ofScotland Yard."
"You were not yourself at fault at all, then?"
"From the first, two facts were very obvious to me, the one that thelady had been quite willing to undergo the wedding ceremony, theother that she had repented of it within a few minutes of returninghome. Obviously something had occurred during the morning, then, tocause her to change her mind. What could that something be? She couldnot have spoken to anyone when she was out, for she had been in thecompany of the bridegroom. Had she seen someone, then? If she had, itmust be someone from America because she had spent so short a time inthis country that she could hardly have allowed anyone to acquire sodeep an influence over her that the mere sight of him would induceher to change her plans so completely. You see we have alreadyarrived, by a process of exclusion, at the idea that she might haveseen an American. Then who could this American be, and why should hepossess so much influence over her? It might be a lover; it might bea husband. Her young womanhood had, I knew, been spent in roughscenes and under strange conditions. So far I had got before I everheard Lord St. Simon's narrative. When he told us of a man in a pew,of the change in the bride's manner, of so transparent a device forobtaining a note as the dropping of a bouquet, of her resort to herconfidential maid, and of her very significant allusion toclaim-jumping--which in miners' parlance means taking possession ofthat which another person has a prior claim to--the whole situationbecame absolutely clear. She had gone off with a man, and the man waseither a lover or was a previous husband--the chances being in favourof the latter."
"And how in the world did you find them?"
"It might have been difficult, but friend Lestrade held informationin his hands the value of which he did not himself know. The initialswere, of course, of the highest importance, but more valuable stillwas it to know that within a week he had settled his bill at one ofthe most select London hotels."
"How did you deduce the select?"
"By the select prices. Eight shillings for a bed and eightpence for aglass of sherry pointed to one of the most expensive hotels. Thereare not many in London which charge at that rate. In the second onewhich I visited in Northumberland Avenue, I learned by an inspectionof the book that Francis H. Moulton, an American gentleman, had leftonly the day before, and on looking over the entries against him, Icame upon the very items which I had seen in the duplicate bill. Hisletters were to be forwarded to 226 Gordon Square; so thither Itravelled, and being fortunate enough to find the loving couple athome, I ventured to give them some paternal advice and to point outto them that it would be better in every way that they should maketheir position a little clearer both to the general public and toLord St. Simon in particular. I invited them to meet him here, and,as you see, I made him keep the appointment."
"But with no very good result," I remarked. "His conduct wascertainly not very gracious."
"Ah, Watson," said Holmes, smiling, "perhaps you would not be verygracious either, if, after all the trouble of wooing and wedding, youfound yourself deprived in an instant of wife and of fortune. I thinkthat we may judge Lord St. Simon very mercifully and thank our starsthat we are never likely to find ourselves in the same position. Drawyour chair up and hand me my violin, for the only problem we havestill to solve is how to while away these bleak autumnal evenings."





                  THE ADVENTURE OF THE BERYL CORONET
"Holmes," said I as I stood one morning in our bow-window lookingdown the street, "here is a madman coming along. It seems rather sadthat his relatives should allow him to come out alone."
My friend rose lazily from his armchair and stood with his hands inthe pockets of his dressing-gown, looking over my shoulder. It was abright, crisp February morning, and the snow of the day before stilllay deep upon the ground, shimmering brightly in the wintry sun. Downthe centre of Baker Street it had been ploughed into a brown crumblyband by the traffic, but at either side and on the heaped-up edges ofthe foot-paths it still lay as white as when it fell. The greypavement had been cleaned and scraped, but was still dangerouslyslippery, so that there were fewer passengers than usual. Indeed,from the direction of the Metropolitan Station no one was coming savethe single gentleman whose eccentric conduct had drawn my attention.
He was a man of about fifty, tall, portly, and imposing, with amassive, strongly marked face and a commanding figure. He was dressedin a sombre yet rich style, in black frock-coat, shining hat, neatbrown gaiters, and well-cut pearl-grey trousers. Yet his actions werein absurd contrast to the dignity of his dress and features, for hewas running hard, with occasional little springs, such as a weary mangives who is little accustomed to set any tax upon his legs. As heran he jerked his hands up and down, waggled his head, and writhedhis face into the most extraordinary contortions.
"What on earth can be the matter with him?" I asked. "He is lookingup at the numbers of the houses."
"I believe that he is coming here," said Holmes, rubbing his hands.
"Here?"
"Yes; I rather think he is coming to consult me professionally. Ithink that I recognise the symptoms. Ha! did I not tell you?" As hespoke, the man, puffing and blowing, rushed at our door and pulled atour bell until the whole house resounded with the clanging.
A few moments later he was in our room, still puffing, stillgesticulating, but with so fixed a look of grief and despair in hiseyes that our smiles were turned in an instant to horror and pity.For a while he could not get his words out, but swayed his body andplucked at his hair like one who has been driven to the extremelimits of his reason. Then, suddenly springing to his feet, he beathis head against the wall with such force that we both rushed uponhim and tore him away to the centre of the room. Sherlock Holmespushed him down into the easy-chair and, sitting beside him, pattedhis hand and chatted with him in the easy, soothing tones which heknew so well how to employ.
"You have come to me to tell your story, have you not?" said he. "Youare fatigued with your haste. Pray wait until you have recoveredyourself, and then I shall be most happy to look into any littleproblem which you may submit to me."
The man sat for a minute or more with a heaving chest, fightingagainst his emotion. Then he passed his handkerchief over his brow,set his lips tight, and turned his face towards us.
"No doubt you think me mad?" said he.
"I see that you have had some great trouble," responded Holmes.
"God knows I have!--a trouble which is enough to unseat my reason, sosudden and so terrible is it. Public disgrace I might have faced,although I am a man whose character has never yet borne a stain.Private affliction also is the lot of every man; but the two comingtogether, and in so frightful a form, have been enough to shake myvery soul. Besides, it is not I alone. The very noblest in the landmay suffer unless some way be found out of this horrible affair."
"Pray compose yourself, sir," said Holmes, "and let me have a clearaccount of who you are and what it is that has befallen you."
"My name," answered our visitor, "is probably familiar to your ears.I am Alexander Holder, of the banking firm of Holder & Stevenson, ofThreadneedle Street."
The name was indeed well known to us as belonging to the seniorpartner in the second largest private banking concern in the City ofLondon. What could have happened, then, to bring one of the foremostcitizens of London to this most pitiable pass? We waited, allcuriosity, until with another effort he braced himself to tell hisstory.
"I feel that time is of value," said he; "that is why I hastened herewhen the police inspector suggested that I should secure yourco-operation. I came to Baker Street by the Underground and hurriedfrom there on foot, for the cabs go slowly through this snow. That iswhy I was so out of breath, for I am a man who takes very littleexercise. I feel better now, and I will put the facts before you asshortly and yet as clearly as I can.
"It is, of course, well known to you that in a successful bankingbusiness as much depends upon our being able to find remunerativeinvestments for our funds as upon our increasing our connection andthe number of our depositors. One of our most lucrative means oflaying out money is in the shape of loans, where the security isunimpeachable. We have done a good deal in this direction during thelast few years, and there are many noble families to whom we haveadvanced large sums upon the security of their pictures, libraries,or plate.
"Yesterday morning I was seated in my office at the bank when a cardwas brought in to me by one of the clerks. I started when I saw thename, for it was that of none other than--well, perhaps even to you Ihad better say no more than that it was a name which is a householdword all over the earth--one of the highest, noblest, most exaltednames in England. I was overwhelmed by the honour and attempted, whenhe entered, to say so, but he plunged at once into business with theair of a man who wishes to hurry quickly through a disagreeable task.
"'Mr. Holder,' said he, 'I have been informed that you are in thehabit of advancing money.'
"'The firm does so when the security is good.' I answered.
"'It is absolutely essential to me,' said he, 'that I should have50,000 at once. I could, of course, borrow so trifling a sum tentimes over from my friends, but I much prefer to make it a matter ofbusiness and to carry out that business myself. In my position youcan readily understand that it is unwise to place one's self underobligations.'
"'For how long, may I ask, do you want this sum?' I asked.
"'Next Monday I have a large sum due to me, and I shall then mostcertainly repay what you advance, with whatever interest you think itright to charge. But it is very essential to me that the money shouldbe paid at once.'
"'I should be happy to advance it without further parley from my ownprivate purse,' said I, 'were it not that the strain would be rathermore than it could bear. If, on the other hand, I am to do it in thename of the firm, then in justice to my partner I must insist that,even in your case, every businesslike precaution should be taken.'
"'I should much prefer to have it so,' said he, raising up a square,black morocco case which he had laid beside his chair.  'You havedoubtless heard of the Beryl Coronet?'
"'One of the most precious public possessions of the empire,' said I.
"'Precisely.' He opened the case, and there, imbedded in soft,flesh-coloured velvet, lay the magnificent piece of jewellery whichhe had named. 'There are thirty-nine enormous beryls,' said he, 'andthe price of the gold chasing is incalculable. The lowest estimatewould put the worth of the coronet at double the sum which I haveasked. I am prepared to leave it with you as my security.'
"I took the precious case into my hands and looked in some perplexityfrom it to my illustrious client.
"'You doubt its value?' he asked.
"'Not at all. I only doubt--'
"'The propriety of my leaving it. You may set your mind at rest aboutthat. I should not dream of doing so were it not absolutely certainthat I should be able in four days to reclaim it. It is a pure matterof form. Is the security sufficient?'
"'Ample.'
"'You understand, Mr. Holder, that I am giving you a strong proof ofthe confidence which I have in you, founded upon all that I haveheard of you. I rely upon you not only to be discreet and to refrainfrom all gossip upon the matter but, above all, to preserve thiscoronet with every possible precaution because I need not say that agreat public scandal would be caused if any harm were to befall it.Any injury to it would be almost as serious as its complete loss, forthere are no beryls in the world to match these, and it would beimpossible to replace them. I leave it with you, however, with everyconfidence, and I shall call for it in person on Monday morning.'
"Seeing that my client was anxious to leave, I said no more but,calling for my cashier, I ordered him to pay over fifty 1000 notes.When I was alone once more, however, with the precious case lyingupon the table in front of me, I could not but think with somemisgivings of the immense responsibility which it entailed upon me.There could be no doubt that, as it was a national possession, ahorrible scandal would ensue if any misfortune should occur to it. Ialready regretted having ever consented to take charge of it.However, it was too late to alter the matter now, so I locked it upin my private safe and turned once more to my work.
"When evening came I felt that it would be an imprudence to leave soprecious a thing in the office behind me. Bankers' safes had beenforced before now, and why should not mine be? If so, how terriblewould be the position in which I should find myself! I determined,therefore, that for the next few days I would always carry the casebackward and forward with me, so that it might never be really out ofmy reach. With this intention, I called a cab and drove out to myhouse at Streatham, carrying the jewel with me. I did not breathefreely until I had taken it upstairs and locked it in the bureau ofmy dressing-room.
"And now a word as to my household, Mr. Holmes, for I wish you tothoroughly understand the situation. My groom and my page sleep outof the house, and may be set aside altogether. I have threemaid-servants who have been with me a number of years and whoseabsolute reliability is quite above suspicion. Another, Lucy Parr,the second waiting-maid, has only been in my service a few months.She came with an excellent character, however, and has always givenme satisfaction. She is a very pretty girl and has attracted admirerswho have occasionally hung about the place. That is the only drawbackwhich we have found to her, but we believe her to be a thoroughlygood girl in every way.
"So much for the servants. My family itself is so small that it willnot take me long to describe it. I am a widower and have an only son,Arthur. He has been a disappointment to me, Mr. Holmes--a grievousdisappointment. I have no doubt that I am myself to blame. Peopletell me that I have spoiled him. Very likely I have. When my dearwife died I felt that he was all I had to love. I could not bear tosee the smile fade even for a moment from his face. I have neverdenied him a wish. Perhaps it would have been better for both of ushad I been sterner, but I meant it for the best.
"It was naturally my intention that he should succeed me in mybusiness, but he was not of a business turn. He was wild, wayward,and, to speak the truth, I could not trust him in the handling oflarge sums of money. When he was young he became a member of anaristocratic club, and there, having charming manners, he was soonthe intimate of a number of men with long purses and expensivehabits. He learned to play heavily at cards and to squander money onthe turf, until he had again and again to come to me and implore meto give him an advance upon his allowance, that he might settle hisdebts of honour. He tried more than once to break away from thedangerous company which he was keeping, but each time the influenceof his friend, Sir George Burnwell, was enough to draw him backagain.
"And, indeed, I could not wonder that such a man as Sir GeorgeBurnwell should gain an influence over him, for he has frequentlybrought him to my house, and I have found myself that I could hardlyresist the fascination of his manner. He is older than Arthur, a manof the world to his finger-tips, one who had been everywhere, seeneverything, a brilliant talker, and a man of great personal beauty.Yet when I think of him in cold blood, far away from the glamour ofhis presence, I am convinced from his cynical speech and the lookwhich I have caught in his eyes that he is one who should be deeplydistrusted. So I think, and so, too, thinks my little Mary, who has awoman's quick insight into character.
"And now there is only she to be described. She is my niece; but whenmy brother died five years ago and left her alone in the world Iadopted her, and have looked upon her ever since as my daughter. Sheis a sunbeam in my house--sweet, loving, beautiful, a wonderfulmanager and housekeeper, yet as tender and quiet and gentle as awoman could be. She is my right hand. I do not know what I could dowithout her. In only one matter has she ever gone against my wishes.Twice my boy has asked her to marry him, for he loves her devotedly,but each time she has refused him. I think that if anyone could havedrawn him into the right path it would have been she, and that hismarriage might have changed his whole life; but now, alas! it is toolate--forever too late!
"Now, Mr. Holmes, you know the people who live under my roof, and Ishall continue with my miserable story.
"When we were taking coffee in the drawing-room that night afterdinner, I told Arthur and Mary my experience, and of the precioustreasure which we had under our roof, suppressing only the name of myclient. Lucy Parr, who had brought in the coffee, had, I am sure,left the room; but I cannot swear that the door was closed. Mary andArthur were much interested and wished to see the famous coronet, butI thought it better not to disturb it.
"'Where have you put it?' asked Arthur.
"'In my own bureau.'
"'Well, I hope to goodness the house won't be burgled during thenight.' said he.
"'It is locked up,' I answered.
"'Oh, any old key will fit that bureau. When I was a youngster I haveopened it myself with the key of the box-room cupboard.'
"He often had a wild way of talking, so that I thought little of whathe said. He followed me to my room, however, that night with a verygrave face.
"'Look here, dad,' said he with his eyes cast down, 'can you let mehave 200?'
"'No, I cannot!' I answered sharply. 'I have been far too generouswith you in money matters.'
"'You have been very kind,' said he, 'but I must have this money, orelse I can never show my face inside the club again.'
"'And a very good thing, too!' I cried.
"'Yes, but you would not have me leave it a dishonoured man,' saidhe. 'I could not bear the disgrace. I must raise the money in someway, and if you will not let me have it, then I must try othermeans.'
"I was very angry, for this was the third demand during the month.'You shall not have a farthing from me,' I cried, on which he bowedand left the room without another word.
"When he was gone I unlocked my bureau, made sure that my treasurewas safe, and locked it again. Then I started to go round the houseto see that all was secure--a duty which I usually leave to Mary butwhich I thought it well to perform myself that night. As I came downthe stairs I saw Mary herself at the side window of the hall, whichshe closed and fastened as I approached.
"'Tell me, dad,' said she, looking, I thought, a little disturbed,'did you give Lucy, the maid, leave to go out to-night?'
"'Certainly not.'
"'She came in just now by the back door. I have no doubt that she hasonly been to the side gate to see someone, but I think that it ishardly safe and should be stopped.'
"'You must speak to her in the morning, or I will if you prefer it.Are you sure that everything is fastened?'
"'Quite sure, dad.'
"'Then, good-night.' I kissed her and went up to my bedroom again,where I was soon asleep.
"I am endeavouring to tell you everything, Mr. Holmes, which may haveany bearing upon the case, but I beg that you will question me uponany point which I do not make clear."
"On the contrary, your statement is singularly lucid."
"I come to a part of my story now in which I should wish to beparticularly so. I am not a very heavy sleeper, and the anxiety in mymind tended, no doubt, to make me even less so than usual. About twoin the morning, then, I was awakened by some sound in the house. Ithad ceased ere I was wide awake, but it had left an impression behindit as though a window had gently closed somewhere. I lay listeningwith all my ears. Suddenly, to my horror, there was a distinct soundof footsteps moving softly in the next room. I slipped out of bed,all palpitating with fear, and peeped round the corner of mydressing-room door.
"'Arthur!' I screamed, 'you villain! you thief! How dare you touchthat coronet?'
"The gas was half up, as I had left it, and my unhappy boy, dressedonly in his shirt and trousers, was standing beside the light,holding the coronet in his hands. He appeared to be wrenching at it,or bending it with all his strength. At my cry he dropped it from hisgrasp and turned as pale as death. I snatched it up and examined it.One of the gold corners, with three of the beryls in it, was missing.
"'You blackguard!' I shouted, beside myself with rage. 'You havedestroyed it! You have dishonoured me forever! Where are the jewelswhich you have stolen?'
"'Stolen!' he cried.
"'Yes, thief!' I roared, shaking him by the shoulder.
"'There are none missing. There cannot be any missing,' said he.
"'There are three missing. And you know where they are. Must I callyou a liar as well as a thief? Did I not see you trying to tear offanother piece?'
"'You have called me names enough,' said he, 'I will not stand it anylonger. I shall not say another word about this business, since youhave chosen to insult me. I will leave your house in the morning andmake my own way in the world.'
"'You shall leave it in the hands of the police!' I cried half-madwith grief and rage. 'I shall have this matter probed to the bottom.'
"'You shall learn nothing from me,' said he with a passion such as Ishould not have thought was in his nature. 'If you choose to call thepolice, let the police find what they can.'
"By this time the whole house was astir, for I had raised my voice inmy anger. Mary was the first to rush into my room, and, at the sightof the coronet and of Arthur's face, she read the whole story and,with a scream, fell down senseless on the ground. I sent thehouse-maid for the police and put the investigation into their handsat once. When the inspector and a constable entered the house,Arthur, who had stood sullenly with his arms folded, asked me whetherit was my intention to charge him with theft. I answered that it hadceased to be a private matter, but had become a public one, since theruined coronet was national property. I was determined that the lawshould have its way in everything.
"'At least,' said he, 'you will not have me arrested at once. Itwould be to your advantage as well as mine if I might leave the housefor five minutes.'
"'That you may get away, or perhaps that you may conceal what youhave stolen,' said I. And then, realising the dreadful position inwhich I was placed, I implored him to remember that not only myhonour but that of one who was far greater than I was at stake; andthat he threatened to raise a scandal which would convulse thenation. He might avert it all if he would but tell me what he haddone with the three missing stones.
"'You may as well face the matter,' said I; 'you have been caught inthe act, and no confession could make your guilt more heinous. If youbut make such reparation as is in your power, by telling us where theberyls are, all shall be forgiven and forgotten.'
"'Keep your forgiveness for those who ask for it,' he answered,turning away from me with a sneer. I saw that he was too hardened forany words of mine to influence him. There was but one way for it. Icalled in the inspector and gave him into custody. A search was madeat once not only of his person but of his room and of every portionof the house where he could possibly have concealed the gems; but notrace of them could be found, nor would the wretched boy open hismouth for all our persuasions and our threats. This morning he wasremoved to a cell, and I, after going through all the policeformalities, have hurried round to you to implore you to use yourskill in unravelling the matter. The police have openly confessedthat they can at present make nothing of it. You may go to anyexpense which you think necessary. I have already offered a reward of1000. My God, what shall I do! I have lost my honour, my gems, andmy son in one night. Oh, what shall I do!"
He put a hand on either side of his head and rocked himself to andfro, droning to himself like a child whose grief has got beyondwords.
Sherlock Holmes sat silent for some few minutes, with his browsknitted and his eyes fixed upon the fire.
"Do you receive much company?" he asked.
"None save my partner with his family and an occasional friend ofArthur's. Sir George Burnwell has been several times lately. No oneelse, I think."
"Do you go out much in society?"
"Arthur does. Mary and I stay at home. We neither of us care for it."
"That is unusual in a young girl."
"She is of a quiet nature. Besides, she is not so very young. She isfour-and-twenty."
"This matter, from what you say, seems to have been a shock to heralso."
"Terrible! She is even more affected than I."
"You have neither of you any doubt as to your son's guilt?"
"How can we have when I saw him with my own eyes with the coronet inhis hands."
"I hardly consider that a conclusive proof. Was the remainder of thecoronet at all injured?"
"Yes, it was twisted."
"Do you not think, then, that he might have been trying to straightenit?"
"God bless you! You are doing what you can for him and for me. But itis too heavy a task. What was he doing there at all? If his purposewere innocent, why did he not say so?"
"Precisely. And if it were guilty, why did he not invent a lie? Hissilence appears to me to cut both ways. There are several singularpoints about the case. What did the police think of the noise whichawoke you from your sleep?"
"They considered that it might be caused by Arthur's closing hisbedroom door."
"A likely story! As if a man bent on felony would slam his door so asto wake a household. What did they say, then, of the disappearance ofthese gems?"
"They are still sounding the planking and probing the furniture inthe hope of finding them."
"Have they thought of looking outside the house?"
"Yes, they have shown extraordinary energy. The whole garden hasalready been minutely examined."
"Now, my dear sir," said Holmes. "is it not obvious to you now thatthis matter really strikes very much deeper than either you or thepolice were at first inclined to think? It appeared to you to be asimple case; to me it seems exceedingly complex. Consider what isinvolved by your theory. You suppose that your son came down from hisbed, went, at great risk, to your dressing-room, opened your bureau,took out your coronet, broke off by main force a small portion of it,went off to some other place, concealed three gems out of thethirty-nine, with such skill that nobody can find them, and thenreturned with the other thirty-six into the room in which he exposedhimself to the greatest danger of being discovered. I ask you now, issuch a theory tenable?"
"But what other is there?" cried the banker with a gesture ofdespair. "If his motives were innocent, why does he not explainthem?"
"It is our task to find that out," replied Holmes; "so now, if youplease, Mr. Holder, we will set off for Streatham together, anddevote an hour to glancing a little more closely into details."
My friend insisted upon my accompanying them in their expedition,which I was eager enough to do, for my curiosity and sympathy weredeeply stirred by the story to which we had listened. I confess thatthe guilt of the banker's son appeared to me to be as obvious as itdid to his unhappy father, but still I had such faith in Holmes'judgment that I felt that there must be some grounds for hope as longas he was dissatisfied with the accepted explanation. He hardly spokea word the whole way out to the southern suburb, but sat with hischin upon his breast and his hat drawn over his eyes, sunk in thedeepest thought. Our client appeared to have taken fresh heart at thelittle glimpse of hope which had been presented to him, and he evenbroke into a desultory chat with me over his business affairs. Ashort railway journey and a shorter walk brought us to Fairbank, themodest residence of the great financier.
Fairbank was a good-sized square house of white stone, standing backa little from the road. A double carriage-sweep, with a snow-cladlawn, stretched down in front to two large iron gates which closedthe entrance. On the right side was a small wooden thicket, which ledinto a narrow path between two neat hedges stretching from the roadto the kitchen door, and forming the tradesmen's entrance. On theleft ran a lane which led to the stables, and was not itself withinthe grounds at all, being a public, though little used, thoroughfare.Holmes left us standing at the door and walked slowly all round thehouse, across the front, down the tradesmen's path, and so round bythe garden behind into the stable lane. So long was he that Mr.Holder and I went into the dining-room and waited by the fire untilhe should return. We were sitting there in silence when the dooropened and a young lady came in. She was rather above the middleheight, slim, with dark hair and eyes, which seemed the darkeragainst the absolute pallor of her skin. I do not think that I haveever seen such deadly paleness in a woman's face. Her lips, too, werebloodless, but her eyes were flushed with crying. As she sweptsilently into the room she impressed me with a greater sense of griefthan the banker had done in the morning, and it was the more strikingin her as she was evidently a woman of strong character, with immensecapacity for self-restraint. Disregarding my presence, she wentstraight to her uncle and passed her hand over his head with a sweetwomanly caress.
"You have given orders that Arthur should be liberated, have you not,dad?" she asked.
"No, no, my girl, the matter must be probed to the bottom."
"But I am so sure that he is innocent. You know what woman'sinstincts are. I know that he has done no harm and that you will besorry for having acted so harshly."
"Why is he silent, then, if he is innocent?"
"Who knows? Perhaps because he was so angry that you should suspecthim."
"How could I help suspecting him, when I actually saw him with thecoronet in his hand?"
"Oh, but he had only picked it up to look at it. Oh, do, do take myword for it that he is innocent. Let the matter drop and say no more.It is so dreadful to think of our dear Arthur in a prison!"
"I shall never let it drop until the gems are found--never, Mary!Your affection for Arthur blinds you as to the awful consequences tome. Far from hushing the thing up, I have brought a gentleman downfrom London to inquire more deeply into it."
"This gentleman?" she asked, facing round to me.
"No, his friend. He wished us to leave him alone. He is round in thestable lane now."
"The stable lane?" She raised her dark eyebrows. "What can he hope tofind there? Ah! this, I suppose, is he. I trust, sir, that you willsucceed in proving, what I feel sure is the truth, that my cousinArthur is innocent of this crime."
"I fully share your opinion, and I trust, with you, that we may proveit," returned Holmes, going back to the mat to knock the snow fromhis shoes. "I believe I have the honour of addressing Miss MaryHolder. Might I ask you a question or two?"
"Pray do, sir, if it may help to clear this horrible affair up."
"You heard nothing yourself last night?"
"Nothing, until my uncle here began to speak loudly. I heard that,and I came down."
"You shut up the windows and doors the night before. Did you fastenall the windows?"
"Yes."
"Were they all fastened this morning?"
"Yes."
"You have a maid who has a sweetheart? I think that you remarked toyour uncle last night that she had been out to see him?"
"Yes, and she was the girl who waited in the drawing-room, and whomay have heard uncle's remarks about the coronet."
"I see. You infer that she may have gone out to tell her sweetheart,and that the two may have planned the robbery."
"But what is the good of all these vague theories," cried the bankerimpatiently, "when I have told you that I saw Arthur with the coronetin his hands?"
"Wait a little, Mr. Holder. We must come back to that. About thisgirl, Miss Holder. You saw her return by the kitchen door, Ipresume?"
"Yes; when I went to see if the door was fastened for the night I mether slipping in. I saw the man, too, in the gloom."
"Do you know him?"
"Oh, yes! he is the green-grocer who brings our vegetables round. His name is Francis Prosper."
"He stood," said Holmes, "to the left of the door--that is to say,farther up the path than is necessary to reach the door?"
"Yes, he did."
"And he is a man with a wooden leg?"
Something like fear sprang up in the young lady's expressive blackeyes. "Why, you are like a magician," said she. "How do you knowthat?" She smiled, but there was no answering smile in Holmes' thin,eager face.
"I should be very glad now to go upstairs," said he. "I shallprobably wish to go over the outside of the house again. Perhaps Ihad better take a look at the lower windows before I go up."
He walked swiftly round from one to the other, pausing only at thelarge one which looked from the hall onto the stable lane. This heopened and made a very careful examination of the sill with hispowerful magnifying lens. "Now we shall go upstairs," said he atlast.
The banker's dressing-room was a plainly furnished little chamber,with a grey carpet, a large bureau, and a long mirror. Holmes went tothe bureau first and looked hard at the lock.
"Which key was used to open it?" he asked.
"That which my son himself indicated--that of the cupboard of thelumber-room."
"Have you it here?"
"That is it on the dressing-table."
Sherlock Holmes took it up and opened the bureau.
"It is a noiseless lock," said he. "It is no wonder that it did notwake you. This case, I presume, contains the coronet. We must have alook at it." He opened the case, and taking out the diadem he laid itupon the table. It was a magnificent specimen of the jeweller's art,and the thirty-six stones were the finest that I have ever seen. Atone side of the coronet was a cracked edge, where a corner holdingthree gems had been torn away.
"Now, Mr. Holder," said Holmes, "here is the corner which correspondsto that which has been so unfortunately lost. Might I beg that youwill break it off."
The banker recoiled in horror. "I should not dream of trying," saidhe.
"Then I will." Holmes suddenly bent his strength upon it, but withoutresult. "I feel it give a little," said he; "but, though I amexceptionally strong in the fingers, it would take me all my time tobreak it. An ordinary man could not do it. Now, what do you thinkwould happen if I did break it, Mr. Holder? There would be a noiselike a pistol shot. Do you tell me that all this happened within afew yards of your bed and that you heard nothing of it?"
"I do not know what to think. It is all dark to me."
"But perhaps it may grow lighter as we go. What do you think, MissHolder?"
"I confess that I still share my uncle's perplexity."
"Your son had no shoes or slippers on when you saw him?"
"He had nothing on save only his trousers and shirt."
"Thank you. We have certainly been favoured with extraordinary luckduring this inquiry, and it will be entirely our own fault if we donot succeed in clearing the matter up. With your permission, Mr.Holder, I shall now continue my investigations outside."
He went alone, at his own request, for he explained that anyunnecessary footmarks might make his task more difficult. For an houror more he was at work, returning at last with his feet heavy withsnow and his features as inscrutable as ever.
"I think that I have seen now all that there is to see, Mr. Holder,"said he; "I can serve you best by returning to my rooms."
"But the gems, Mr. Holmes. Where are they?"
"I cannot tell."
The banker wrung his hands. "I shall never see them again!" he cried."And my son? You give me hopes?"
"My opinion is in no way altered."
"Then, for God's sake, what was this dark business which was acted inmy house last night?"
"If you can call upon me at my Baker Street rooms to-morrow morningbetween nine and ten I shall be happy to do what I can to make itclearer. I understand that you give me carte blanche to act for you,provided only that I get back the gems, and that you place no limiton the sum I may draw."
"I would give my fortune to have them back."
"Very good. I shall look into the matter between this and then. Good-bye; it is just possible that I may have to come over here againbefore evening."
It was obvious to me that my companion's mind was now made up aboutthe case, although what his conclusions were was more than I couldeven dimly imagine. Several times during our homeward journey Iendeavoured to sound him upon the point, but he always glided away tosome other topic, until at last I gave it over in despair. It was notyet three when we found ourselves in our rooms once more. He hurriedto his chamber and was down again in a few minutes dressed as acommon loafer. With his collar turned up, his shiny, seedy coat, hisred cravat, and his worn boots, he was a perfect sample of the class.
"I think that this should do," said he, glancing into the glass abovethe fireplace. "I only wish that you could come with me, Watson, butI fear that it won't do. I may be on the trail in this matter, or Imay be following a will-o'-the-wisp, but I shall soon know which itis. I hope that I may be back in a few hours." He cut a slice of beeffrom the joint upon the sideboard, sandwiched it between two roundsof bread, and thrusting this rude meal into his pocket he started offupon his expedition.
I had just finished my tea when he returned, evidently in excellentspirits, swinging an old elastic-sided boot in his hand. He chuckedit down into a corner and helped himself to a cup of tea.
"I only looked in as I passed," said he. "I am going right on."
"Where to?"
"Oh, to the other side of the West End. It may be some time before Iget back. Don't wait up for me in case I should be late."
"How are you getting on?"
"Oh, so so. Nothing to complain of. I have been out to Streathamsince I saw you last, but I did not call at the house. It is a verysweet little problem, and I would not have missed it for a good deal.However, I must not sit gossiping here, but must get thesedisreputable clothes off and return to my highly respectable self."
I could see by his manner that he had stronger reasons forsatisfaction than his words alone would imply. His eyes twinkled, andthere was even a touch of colour upon his sallow cheeks. He hastenedupstairs, and a few minutes later I heard the slam of the hall door,which told me that he was off once more upon his congenial hunt.
I waited until midnight, but there was no sign of his return, so Iretired to my room. It was no uncommon thing for him to be away fordays and nights on end when he was hot upon a scent, so that hislateness caused me no surprise. I do not know at what hour he camein, but when I came down to breakfast in the morning there he waswith a cup of coffee in one hand and the paper in the other, as freshand trim as possible.
"You will excuse my beginning without you, Watson," said he, "but youremember that our client has rather an early appointment thismorning."
"Why, it is after nine now," I answered. "I should not be surprisedif that were he. I thought I heard a ring."
It was, indeed, our friend the financier. I was shocked by the changewhich had come over him, for his face which was naturally of a broadand massive mould, was now pinched and fallen in, while his hairseemed to me at least a shade whiter. He entered with a weariness andlethargy which was even more painful than his violence of the morningbefore, and he dropped heavily into the armchair which I pushedforward for him.
"I do not know what I have done to be so severely tried," said he."Only two days ago I was a happy and prosperous man, without a carein the world. Now I am left to a lonely and dishonoured age. Onesorrow comes close upon the heels of another. My niece, Mary, hasdeserted me."
"Deserted you?"
"Yes. Her bed this morning had not been slept in, her room was empty,and a note for me lay upon the hall table. I had said to her lastnight, in sorrow and not in anger, that if she had married my boy allmight have been well with him. Perhaps it was thoughtless of me tosay so. It is to that remark that she refers in this note:
"'My dearest Uncle:"'I feel that I have brought trouble upon you, and that if I hadacted differently this terrible misfortune might never have occurred.I cannot, with this thought in my mind, ever again be happy underyour roof, and I feel that I must leave you forever. Do not worryabout my future, for that is provided for; and, above all, do notsearch for me, for it will be fruitless labour and an ill-service tome. In life or in death, I am ever"'Your loving"'Mary.'
"What could she mean by that note, Mr. Holmes? Do you think it pointsto suicide?"
"No, no, nothing of the kind. It is perhaps the best possiblesolution. I trust, Mr. Holder, that you are nearing the end of yourtroubles."
"Ha! You say so! You have heard something, Mr. Holmes; you havelearned something! Where are the gems?"
"You would not think 1000 pounds apiece an excessive sum for them?"
"I would pay ten."
"That would be unnecessary. Three thousand will cover the matter. Andthere is a little reward, I fancy. Have you your check-book?  Here isa pen. Better make it out for 4000."
With a dazed face the banker made out the required check. Holmeswalked over to his desk, took out a little triangular piece of goldwith three gems in it, and threw it down upon the table.
With a shriek of joy our client clutched it up.
"You have it!" he gasped. "I am saved! I am saved!"
The reaction of joy was as passionate as his grief had been, and hehugged his recovered gems to his bosom.
"There is one other thing you owe, Mr. Holder," said Sherlock Holmesrather sternly.
"Owe!" He caught up a pen. "Name the sum, and I will pay it."
"No, the debt is not to me. You owe a very humble apology to thatnoble lad, your son, who has carried himself in this matter as Ishould be proud to see my own son do, should I ever chance to haveone."
"Then it was not Arthur who took them?"
"I told you yesterday, and I repeat to-day, that it was not."
"You are sure of it! Then let us hurry to him at once to let him knowthat the truth is known."
"He knows it already. When I had cleared it all up I had an interviewwith him, and finding that he would not tell me the story, I told itto him, on which he had to confess that I was right and to add thevery few details which were not yet quite clear to me. Your news ofthis morning, however, may open his lips."
"For heaven's sake, tell me, then, what is this extraordinarymystery!"
"I will do so, and I will show you the steps by which I reached it.And let me say to you, first, that which it is hardest for me to sayand for you to hear: there has been an understanding between SirGeorge Burnwell and your niece Mary. They have now fled together."
"My Mary? Impossible!"
"It is unfortunately more than possible; it is certain. Neither younor your son knew the true character of this man when you admittedhim into your family circle. He is one of the most dangerous men inEngland--a ruined gambler, an absolutely desperate villain, a manwithout heart or conscience. Your niece knew nothing of such men.When he breathed his vows to her, as he had done to a hundred beforeher, she flattered herself that she alone had touched his heart. Thedevil knows best what he said, but at least she became his tool andwas in the habit of seeing him nearly every evening."
"I cannot, and I will not, believe it!" cried the banker with anashen face.
"I will tell you, then, what occurred in your house last night. Yourniece, when you had, as she thought, gone to your room, slipped downand talked to her lover through the window which leads into thestable lane. His footmarks had pressed right through the snow, solong had he stood there. She told him of the coronet. His wicked lustfor gold kindled at the news, and he bent her to his will. I have nodoubt that she loved you, but there are women in whom the love of alover extinguishes all other loves, and I think that she must havebeen one. She had hardly listened to his instructions when she sawyou coming downstairs, on which she closed the window rapidly andtold you about one of the servants' escapade with her wooden-leggedlover, which was all perfectly true.
"Your boy, Arthur, went to bed after his interview with you but heslept badly on account of his uneasiness about his club debts. In themiddle of the night he heard a soft tread pass his door, so he roseand, looking out, was surprised to see his cousin walking verystealthily along the passage until she disappeared into yourdressing-room. Petrified with astonishment, the lad slipped on someclothes and waited there in the dark to see what would come of thisstrange affair. Presently she emerged from the room again, and in thelight of the passage-lamp your son saw that she carried the preciouscoronet in her hands. She passed down the stairs, and he, thrillingwith horror, ran along and slipped behind the curtain near your door,whence he could see what passed in the hall beneath. He saw herstealthily open the window, hand out the coronet to someone in thegloom, and then closing it once more hurry back to her room, passingquite close to where he stood hid behind the curtain.
"As long as she was on the scene he could not take any action withouta horrible exposure of the woman whom he loved. But the instant thatshe was gone he realised how crushing a misfortune this would be foryou, and how all-important it was to set it right. He rushed down,just as he was, in his bare feet, opened the window, sprang out intothe snow, and ran down the lane, where he could see a dark figure inthe moonlight. Sir George Burnwell tried to get away, but Arthurcaught him, and there was a struggle between them, your lad tuggingat one side of the coronet, and his opponent at the other. In thescuffle, your son struck Sir George and cut him over the eye. Thensomething suddenly snapped, and your son, finding that he had thecoronet in his hands, rushed back, closed the window, ascended toyour room, and had just observed that the coronet had been twisted inthe struggle and was endeavouring to straighten it when you appearedupon the scene."
"Is it possible?" gasped the banker.
"You then roused his anger by calling him names at a moment when hefelt that he had deserved your warmest thanks. He could not explainthe true state of affairs without betraying one who certainlydeserved little enough consideration at his hands. He took the morechivalrous view, however, and preserved her secret."
"And that was why she shrieked and fainted when she saw the coronet,"cried Mr. Holder. "Oh, my God! what a blind fool I have been! And hisasking to be allowed to go out for five minutes! The dear fellowwanted to see if the missing piece were at the scene of the struggle.How cruelly I have misjudged him!"
"When I arrived at the house," continued Holmes, "I at once went verycarefully round it to observe if there were any traces in the snowwhich might help me. I knew that none had fallen since the eveningbefore, and also that there had been a strong frost to preserveimpressions. I passed along the tradesmen's path, but found it alltrampled down and indistinguishable. Just beyond it, however, at thefar side of the kitchen door, a woman had stood and talked with aman, whose round impressions on one side showed that he had a woodenleg. I could even tell that they had been disturbed, for the womanhad run back swiftly to the door, as was shown by the deep toe andlight heel marks, while Wooden-leg had waited a little, and then hadgone away. I thought at the time that this might be the maid and hersweetheart, of whom you had already spoken to me, and inquiry showedit was so. I passed round the garden without seeing anything morethan random tracks, which I took to be the police; but when I gotinto the stable lane a very long and complex story was written in thesnow in front of me.
"There was a double line of tracks of a booted man, and a seconddouble line which I saw with delight belonged to a man with nakedfeet. I was at once convinced from what you had told me that thelatter was your son. The first had walked both ways, but the otherhad run swiftly, and as his tread was marked in places over thedepression of the boot, it was obvious that he had passed after theother. I followed them up and found they led to the hall window,where Boots had worn all the snow away while waiting. Then I walkedto the other end, which was a hundred yards or more down the lane. Isaw where Boots had faced round, where the snow was cut up as thoughthere had been a struggle, and, finally, where a few drops of bloodhad fallen, to show me that I was not mistaken. Boots had then rundown the lane, and another little smudge of blood showed that it washe who had been hurt. When he came to the highroad at the other end,I found that the pavement had been cleared, so there was an end tothat clue.
"On entering the house, however, I examined, as you remember, thesill and framework of the hall window with my lens, and I could atonce see that someone had passed out. I could distinguish the outlineof an instep where the wet foot had been placed in coming in. I wasthen beginning to be able to form an opinion as to what had occurred.A man had waited outside the window; someone had brought the gems;the deed had been overseen by your son; he had pursued the thief; hadstruggled with him; they had each tugged at the coronet, their unitedstrength causing injuries which neither alone could have effected. Hehad returned with the prize, but had left a fragment in the grasp ofhis opponent. So far I was clear. The question now was, who was theman and who was it brought him the coronet?
"It is an old maxim of mine that when you have excluded theimpossible, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth.Now, I knew that it was not you who had brought it down, so thereonly remained your niece and the maids. But if it were the maids, whyshould your son allow himself to be accused in their place? Therecould be no possible reason. As he loved his cousin, however, therewas an excellent explanation why he should retain her secret--themore so as the secret was a disgraceful one. When I remembered thatyou had seen her at that window, and how she had fainted on seeingthe coronet again, my conjecture became a certainty.
"And who could it be who was her confederate? A lover evidently, forwho else could outweigh the love and gratitude which she must feel toyou? I knew that you went out little, and that your circle of friendswas a very limited one. But among them was Sir George Burnwell. I hadheard of him before as being a man of evil reputation among women. Itmust have been he who wore those boots and retained the missing gems.Even though he knew that Arthur had discovered him, he might stillflatter himself that he was safe, for the lad could not say a wordwithout compromising his own family.
"Well, your own good sense will suggest what measures I took next. Iwent in the shape of a loafer to Sir George's house, managed to pickup an acquaintance with his valet, learned that his master had cuthis head the night before, and, finally, at the expense of sixshillings, made all sure by buying a pair of his cast-off shoes. Withthese I journeyed down to Streatham and saw that they exactly fittedthe tracks."
"I saw an ill-dressed vagabond in the lane yesterday evening," saidMr. Holder.
"Precisely. It was I. I found that I had my man, so I came home andchanged my clothes. It was a delicate part which I had to play then,for I saw that a prosecution must be avoided to avert scandal, and Iknew that so astute a villain would see that our hands were tied inthe matter. I went and saw him. At first, of course, he deniedeverything. But when I gave him every particular that had occurred,he tried to bluster and took down a life-preserver from the wall. Iknew my man, however, and I clapped a pistol to his head before hecould strike. Then he became a little more reasonable. I told himthat we would give him a price for the stones he held--1000 apiece.That brought out the first signs of grief that he had shown. 'Why,dash it all!' said he, 'I've let them go at six hundred for thethree!' I soon managed to get the address of the receiver who hadthem, on promising him that there would be no prosecution. Off I setto him, and after much chaffering I got our stones at 1000 poundsapiece. Then I looked in upon your son, told him that all was right,and eventually got to my bed about two o'clock, after what I may calla really hard day's work."
"A day which has saved England from a great public scandal," said thebanker, rising. "Sir, I cannot find words to thank you, but you shallnot find me ungrateful for what you have done. Your skill has indeedexceeded all that I have heard of it. And now I must fly to my dearboy to apologise to him for the wrong which I have done him. As towhat you tell me of poor Mary, it goes to my very heart. Not evenyour skill can inform me where she is now."
"I think that we may safely say," returned Holmes, "that she iswherever Sir George Burnwell is. It is equally certain, too, thatwhatever her sins are, they will soon receive a more than sufficientpunishment."





                  THE ADVENTURE OF THE COPPER BEECHES
"To the man who loves art for its own sake," remarked SherlockHolmes, tossing aside the advertisement sheet of the Daily Telegraph,"it is frequently in its least important and lowliest manifestationsthat the keenest pleasure is to be derived. It is pleasant to me toobserve, Watson, that you have so far grasped this truth that inthese little records of our cases which you have been good enough todraw up, and, I am bound to say, occasionally to embellish, you havegiven prominence not so much to the many causes clbres andsensational trials in which I have figured but rather to thoseincidents which may have been trivial in themselves, but which havegiven room for those faculties of deduction and of logical synthesiswhich I have made my special province."
"And yet," said I, smiling, "I cannot quite hold myself absolved fromthe charge of sensationalism which has been urged against myrecords."
"You have erred, perhaps," he observed, taking up a glowing cinderwith the tongs and lighting with it the long cherry-wood pipe whichwas wont to replace his clay when he was in a disputatious ratherthan a meditative mood--"you have erred perhaps in attempting to putcolour and life into each of your statements instead of confiningyourself to the task of placing upon record that severe reasoningfrom cause to effect which is really the only notable feature aboutthe thing."
"It seems to me that I have done you full justice in the matter," Iremarked with some coldness, for I was repelled by the egotism whichI had more than once observed to be a strong factor in my friend'ssingular character.
"No, it is not selfishness or conceit," said he, answering, as washis wont, my thoughts rather than my words. "If I claim full justicefor my art, it is because it is an impersonal thing--a thing beyondmyself. Crime is common. Logic is rare. Therefore it is upon thelogic rather than upon the crime that you should dwell. You havedegraded what should have been a course of lectures into a series oftales."
It was a cold morning of the early spring, and we sat after breakfaston either side of a cheery fire in the old room at Baker Street. Athick fog rolled down between the lines of dun-coloured houses, andthe opposing windows loomed like dark, shapeless blurs through theheavy yellow wreaths. Our gas was lit and shone on the white clothand glimmer of china and metal, for the table had not been clearedyet. Sherlock Holmes had been silent all the morning, dippingcontinuously into the advertisement columns of a succession of papersuntil at last, having apparently given up his search, he had emergedin no very sweet temper to lecture me upon my literary shortcomings.
"At the same time," he remarked after a pause, during which he hadsat puffing at his long pipe and gazing down into the fire, "you canhardly be open to a charge of sensationalism, for out of these caseswhich you have been so kind as to interest yourself in, a fairproportion do not treat of crime, in its legal sense, at all. Thesmall matter in which I endeavoured to help the King of Bohemia, thesingular experience of Miss Mary Sutherland, the problem connectedwith the man with the twisted lip, and the incident of the noblebachelor, were all matters which are outside the pale of the law. Butin avoiding the sensational, I fear that you may have bordered on thetrivial."
"The end may have been so," I answered, "but the methods I hold tohave been novel and of interest."
"Pshaw, my dear fellow, what do the public, the great unobservantpublic, who could hardly tell a weaver by his tooth or a compositorby his left thumb, care about the finer shades of analysis anddeduction! But, indeed, if you are trivial, I cannot blame you, forthe days of the great cases are past. Man, or at least criminal man,has lost all enterprise and originality. As to my own littlepractice, it seems to be degenerating into an agency for recoveringlost lead pencils and giving advice to young ladies fromboarding-schools. I think that I have touched bottom at last,however. This note I had this morning marks my zero-point, I fancy.Read it!" He tossed a crumpled letter across to me.
It was dated from Montague Place upon the preceding evening, and ranthus:
Dear Mr. Holmes:I am very anxious to consult you as to whether I should or should notaccept a situation which has been offered to me as governess. I shallcall at half-past ten to-morrow if I do not inconvenience you.Yours faithfully,Violet Hunter.
"Do you know the young lady?" I asked.
"Not I."
"It is half-past ten now."
"Yes, and I have no doubt that is her ring."
"It may turn out to be of more interest than you think. You rememberthat the affair of the blue carbuncle, which appeared to be a merewhim at first, developed into a serious investigation. It may be soin this case, also."
"Well, let us hope so. But our doubts will very soon be solved, forhere, unless I am much mistaken, is the person in question."
As he spoke the door opened and a young lady entered the room. Shewas plainly but neatly dressed, with a bright, quick face, freckledlike a plover's egg, and with the brisk manner of a woman who has hadher own way to make in the world.
"You will excuse my troubling you, I am sure," said she, as mycompanion rose to greet her, "but I have had a very strangeexperience, and as I have no parents or relations of any sort fromwhom I could ask advice, I thought that perhaps you would be kindenough to tell me what I should do."
"Pray take a seat, Miss Hunter. I shall be happy to do anything thatI can to serve you."
I could see that Holmes was favourably impressed by the manner andspeech of his new client. He looked her over in his searchingfashion, and then composed himself, with his lids drooping and hisfinger-tips together, to listen to her story.
"I have been a governess for five years," said she, "in the family ofColonel Spence Munro, but two months ago the colonel received anappointment at Halifax, in Nova Scotia, and took his children over toAmerica with him, so that I found myself without a situation. Iadvertised, and I answered advertisements, but without success. Atlast the little money which I had saved began to run short, and I wasat my wit's end as to what I should do.
"There is a well-known agency for governesses in the West End calledWestaway's, and there I used to call about once a week in order tosee whether anything had turned up which might suit me. Westaway wasthe name of the founder of the business, but it is really managed byMiss Stoper. She sits in her own little office, and the ladies whoare seeking employment wait in an anteroom, and are then shown in oneby one, when she consults her ledgers and sees whether she hasanything which would suit them.
"Well, when I called last week I was shown into the little office asusual, but I found that Miss Stoper was not alone. A prodigiouslystout man with a very smiling face and a great heavy chin whichrolled down in fold upon fold over his throat sat at her elbow with apair of glasses on his nose, looking very earnestly at the ladies whoentered. As I came in he gave quite a jump in his chair and turnedquickly to Miss Stoper.
"'That will do,' said he; 'I could not ask for anything better.Capital! capital!' He seemed quite enthusiastic and rubbed his handstogether in the most genial fashion. He was such acomfortable-looking man that it was quite a pleasure to look at him.
"'You are looking for a situation, miss?' he asked.
"'Yes, sir.'
"'As governess?'
"'Yes, sir.'
"'And what salary do you ask?'
"'I had 4 a month in my last place with Colonel Spence Munro.'
"'Oh, tut, tut! sweating--rank sweating!' he cried, throwing his fathands out into the air like a man who is in a boiling passion. 'Howcould anyone offer so pitiful a sum to a lady with such attractionsand accomplishments?'
"'My accomplishments, sir, may be less than you imagine,' said I. 'Alittle French, a little German, music, and drawing--'
"'Tut, tut!' he cried. 'This is all quite beside the question. Thepoint is, have you or have you not the bearing and deportment of alady? There it is in a nutshell. If you have not, you are not fittedfor the rearing of a child who may some day play a considerable partin the history of the country. But if you have why, then, how couldany gentleman ask you to condescend to accept anything under thethree figures? Your salary with me, madam, would commence at 100 ayear.'
"You may imagine, Mr. Holmes, that to me, destitute as I was, such anoffer seemed almost too good to be true. The gentleman, however,seeing perhaps the look of incredulity upon my face, opened apocket-book and took out a note.
"'It is also my custom,' said he, smiling in the most pleasantfashion until his eyes were just two little shining slits amid thewhite creases of his face, 'to advance to my young ladies half theirsalary beforehand, so that they may meet any little expenses of theirjourney and their wardrobe.'
"It seemed to me that I had never met so fascinating and sothoughtful a man. As I was already in debt to my tradesmen, theadvance was a great convenience, and yet there was somethingunnatural about the whole transaction which made me wish to know alittle more before I quite committed myself.
"'May I ask where you live, sir?' said I.
"'Hampshire. Charming rural place. The Copper Beeches, five miles onthe far side of Winchester. It is the most lovely country, my dearyoung lady, and the dearest old country-house.'
"'And my duties, sir? I should be glad to know what they would be.'
"'One child--one dear little romper just six years old. Oh, if youcould see him killing cockroaches with a slipper! Smack! smack!smack! Three gone before you could wink!' He leaned back in his chairand laughed his eyes into his head again.
"I was a little startled at the nature of the child's amusement, butthe father's laughter made me think that perhaps he was joking.
"'My sole duties, then,' I asked, 'are to take charge of a singlechild?'
"'No, no, not the sole, not the sole, my dear young lady,' he cried.'Your duty would be, as I am sure your good sense would suggest, toobey any little commands my wife might give, provided always thatthey were such commands as a lady might with propriety obey. You seeno difficulty, heh?'
"'I should be happy to make myself useful.'
"'Quite so. In dress now, for example. We are faddy people, youknow--faddy but kind-hearted. If you were asked to wear any dresswhich we might give you, you would not object to our little whim.Heh?'
"'No,' said I, considerably astonished at his words.
"'Or to sit here, or sit there, that would not be offensive to you?'
"'Oh, no.'
"'Or to cut your hair quite short before you come to us?'
"I could hardly believe my ears. As you may observe, Mr. Holmes, myhair is somewhat luxuriant, and of a rather peculiar tint ofchestnut. It has been considered artistic. I could not dream ofsacrificing it in this offhand fashion.
"'I am afraid that that is quite impossible,' said I. He had beenwatching me eagerly out of his small eyes, and I could see a shadowpass over his face as I spoke.
"'I am afraid that it is quite essential,' said he. 'It is a littlefancy of my wife's, and ladies' fancies, you know, madam, ladies'fancies must be consulted. And so you won't cut your hair?'
"'No, sir, I really could not,' I answered firmly.
"'Ah, very well; then that quite settles the matter. It is a pity,because in other respects you would really have done very nicely. Inthat case, Miss Stoper, I had best inspect a few more of your youngladies.'
"The manageress had sat all this while busy with her papers without aword to either of us, but she glanced at me now with so muchannoyance upon her face that I could not help suspecting that she hadlost a handsome commission through my refusal.
"'Do you desire your name to be kept upon the books?' she asked.
"'If you please, Miss Stoper.'
"'Well, really, it seems rather useless, since you refuse the mostexcellent offers in this fashion,' said she sharply. 'You can hardlyexpect us to exert ourselves to find another such opening for you.Good-day to you, Miss Hunter.' She struck a gong upon the table, andI was shown out by the page.
"Well, Mr. Holmes, when I got back to my lodgings and found littleenough in the cupboard, and two or three bills upon the table. Ibegan to ask myself whether I had not done a very foolish thing.After all, if these people had strange fads and expected obedience onthe most extraordinary matters, they were at least ready to pay fortheir eccentricity. Very few governesses in England are getting 100a year. Besides, what use was my hair to me? Many people are improvedby wearing it short and perhaps I should be among the number. Nextday I was inclined to think that I had made a mistake, and by the dayafter I was sure of it. I had almost overcome my pride so far as togo back to the agency and inquire whether the place was still openwhen I received this letter from the gentleman himself. I have ithere and I will read it to you:
"'The Copper Beeches, near Winchester."'Dear Miss Hunter:"'Miss Stoper has very kindly given me your address, and I write fromhere to ask you whether you have reconsidered your decision. My wifeis very anxious that you should come, for she has been much attractedby my description of you. We are willing to give 30 a quarter, or120 a year, so as to recompense you for any little inconveniencewhich our fads may cause you. They are not very exacting, after all.My wife is fond of a particular shade of electric blue and would likeyou to wear such a dress indoors in the morning. You need not,however, go to the expense of purchasing one, as we have onebelonging to my dear daughter Alice (now in Philadelphia), whichwould, I should think, fit you very well. Then, as to sitting here orthere, or amusing yourself in any manner indicated, that need causeyou no inconvenience. As regards your hair, it is no doubt a pity,especially as I could not help remarking its beauty during our shortinterview, but I am afraid that I must remain firm upon this point,and I only hope that the increased salary may recompense you for theloss. Your duties, as far as the child is concerned, are very light.Now do try to come, and I shall meet you with the dog-cart atWinchester. Let me know your train."'Yours faithfully,"'Jephro Rucastle.'
"That is the letter which I have just received, Mr. Holmes, and mymind is made up that I will accept it. I thought, however, thatbefore taking the final step I should like to submit the whole matterto your consideration."
"Well, Miss Hunter, if your mind is made up, that settles thequestion," said Holmes, smiling.
"But you would not advise me to refuse?"
"I confess that it is not the situation which I should like to see asister of mine apply for."
"What is the meaning of it all, Mr. Holmes?"
"Ah, I have no data. I cannot tell. Perhaps you have yourself formedsome opinion?"
"Well, there seems to me to be only one possible solution. Mr.Rucastle seemed to be a very kind, good-natured man. Is it notpossible that his wife is a lunatic, that he desires to keep thematter quiet for fear she should be taken to an asylum, and that hehumours her fancies in every way in order to prevent an outbreak?"
"That is a possible solution--in fact, as matters stand, it is themost probable one. But in any case it does not seem to be a nicehousehold for a young lady."
"But the money, Mr. Holmes, the money!"
"Well, yes, of course the pay is good--too good. That is what makesme uneasy. Why should they give you 120 a year, when they could havetheir pick for 40? There must be some strong reason behind."
"I thought that if I told you the circumstances you would understandafterwards if I wanted your help. I should feel so much stronger if Ifelt that you were at the back of me."
"Oh, you may carry that feeling away with you. I assure you that yourlittle problem promises to be the most interesting which has come myway for some months. There is something distinctly novel about someof the features. If you should find yourself in doubt or in danger--"
"Danger! What danger do you foresee?"
Holmes shook his head gravely. "It would cease to be a danger if wecould define it," said he. "But at any time, day or night, a telegramwould bring me down to your help."
"That is enough." She rose briskly from her chair with the anxietyall swept from her face. "I shall go down to Hampshire quite easy inmy mind now. I shall write to Mr. Rucastle at once, sacrifice my poorhair to-night, and start for Winchester to-morrow." With a fewgrateful words to Holmes she bade us both good-night and bustled offupon her way.
"At least," said I as we heard her quick, firm steps descending thestairs, "she seems to be a young lady who is very well able to takecare of herself."
"And she would need to be," said Holmes gravely. "I am much mistakenif we do not hear from her before many days are past."
It was not very long before my friend's prediction was fulfilled. Afortnight went by, during which I frequently found my thoughtsturning in her direction and wondering what strange side-alley ofhuman experience this lonely woman had strayed into. The unusualsalary, the curious conditions, the light duties, all pointed tosomething abnormal, though whether a fad or a plot, or whether theman were a philanthropist or a villain, it was quite beyond my powersto determine. As to Holmes, I observed that he sat frequently forhalf an hour on end, with knitted brows and an abstracted air, but heswept the matter away with a wave of his hand when I mentioned it."Data! data! data!" he cried impatiently. "I can't make brickswithout clay." And yet he would always wind up by muttering that nosister of his should ever have accepted such a situation.
The telegram which we eventually received came late one night just asI was thinking of turning in and Holmes was settling down to one ofthose all-night chemical researches which he frequently indulged in,when I would leave him stooping over a retort and a test-tube atnight and find him in the same position when I came down to breakfastin the morning. He opened the yellow envelope, and then, glancing atthe message, threw it across to me.
"Just look up the trains in Bradshaw," said he, and turned back tohis chemical studies.
The summons was a brief and urgent one.
Please be at the Black Swan Hotel at Winchester at midday to-morrow[it said]. Do come! I am at my wit's end.Hunter.
"Will you come with me?" asked Holmes, glancing up.
"I should wish to."
"Just look it up, then."
"There is a train at half-past nine," said I, glancing over myBradshaw. "It is due at Winchester at 11.30."
"That will do very nicely. Then perhaps I had better postpone myanalysis of the acetones, as we may need to be at our best in themorning."
By eleven o'clock the next day we were well upon our way to the oldEnglish capital. Holmes had been buried in the morning papers all theway down, but after we had passed the Hampshire border he threw themdown and began to admire the scenery. It was an ideal spring day, alight blue sky, flecked with little fleecy white clouds driftingacross from west to east. The sun was shining very brightly, and yetthere was an exhilarating nip in the air, which set an edge to aman's energy. All over the countryside, away to the rolling hillsaround Aldershot, the little red and grey roofs of the farm-steadingspeeped out from amid the light green of the new foliage.
"Are they not fresh and beautiful?" I cried with all the enthusiasmof a man fresh from the fogs of Baker Street.
But Holmes shook his head gravely.
"Do you know, Watson," said he, "that it is one of the curses of amind with a turn like mine that I must look at everything withreference to my own special subject. You look at these scatteredhouses, and you are impressed by their beauty. I look at them, andthe only thought which comes to me is a feeling of their isolationand of the impunity with which crime may be committed there."
"Good heavens!" I cried. "Who would associate crime with these dearold homesteads?"
"They always fill me with a certain horror. It is my belief, Watson,founded upon my experience, that the lowest and vilest alleys inLondon do not present a more dreadful record of sin than does thesmiling and beautiful countryside."
"You horrify me!"
"But the reason is very obvious. The pressure of public opinion cando in the town what the law cannot accomplish. There is no lane sovile that the scream of a tortured child, or the thud of a drunkard'sblow, does not beget sympathy and indignation among the neighbours,and then the whole machinery of justice is ever so close that a wordof complaint can set it going, and there is but a step between thecrime and the dock. But look at these lonely houses, each in its ownfields, filled for the most part with poor ignorant folk who knowlittle of the law. Think of the deeds of hellish cruelty, the hiddenwickedness which may go on, year in, year out, in such places, andnone the wiser. Had this lady who appeals to us for help gone to livein Winchester, I should never have had a fear for her. It is the fivemiles of country which makes the danger. Still, it is clear that sheis not personally threatened."
"No. If she can come to Winchester to meet us she can get away."
"Quite so. She has her freedom."
"What can be the matter, then? Can you suggest no explanation?"
"I have devised seven separate explanations, each of which wouldcover the facts as far as we know them. But which of these is correctcan only be determined by the fresh information which we shall nodoubt find waiting for us. Well, there is the tower of the cathedral,and we shall soon learn all that Miss Hunter has to tell."
The Black Swan is an inn of repute in the High Street, at no distancefrom the station, and there we found the young lady waiting for us.She had engaged a sitting-room, and our lunch awaited us upon thetable.
"I am so delighted that you have come," she said earnestly. "It is sovery kind of you both; but indeed I do not know what I should do.Your advice will be altogether invaluable to me."
"Pray tell us what has happened to you."
"I will do so, and I must be quick, for I have promised Mr. Rucastleto be back before three. I got his leave to come into town thismorning, though he little knew for what purpose."
"Let us have everything in its due order." Holmes thrust his longthin legs out towards the fire and composed himself to listen.
"In the first place, I may say that I have met, on the whole, with noactual ill-treatment from Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle. It is only fair tothem to say that. But I cannot understand them, and I am not easy inmy mind about them."
"What can you not understand?"
"Their reasons for their conduct. But you shall have it all just asit occurred. When I came down, Mr. Rucastle met me here and drove mein his dog-cart to the Copper Beeches. It is, as he said, beautifullysituated, but it is not beautiful in itself, for it is a large squareblock of a house, whitewashed, but all stained and streaked with dampand bad weather. There are grounds round it, woods on three sides,and on the fourth a field which slopes down to the Southamptonhighroad, which curves past about a hundred yards from the frontdoor. This ground in front belongs to the house, but the woods allround are part of Lord Southerton's preserves. A clump of copperbeeches immediately in front of the hall door has given its name tothe place.
"I was driven over by my employer, who was as amiable as ever, andwas introduced by him that evening to his wife and the child. Therewas no truth, Mr. Holmes, in the conjecture which seemed to us to beprobable in your rooms at Baker Street. Mrs. Rucastle is not mad. Ifound her to be a silent, pale-faced woman, much younger than herhusband, not more than thirty, I should think, while he can hardly beless than forty-five. From their conversation I have gathered thatthey have been married about seven years, that he was a widower, andthat his only child by the first wife was the daughter who has goneto Philadelphia. Mr. Rucastle told me in private that the reason whyshe had left them was that she had an unreasoning aversion to herstepmother. As the daughter could not have been less than twenty, Ican quite imagine that her position must have been uncomfortable withher father's young wife.
"Mrs. Rucastle seemed to me to be colourless in mind as well as infeature. She impressed me neither favourably nor the reverse. She wasa nonentity. It was easy to see that she was passionately devotedboth to her husband and to her little son. Her light grey eyeswandered continually from one to the other, noting every little wantand forestalling it if possible. He was kind to her also in hisbluff, boisterous fashion, and on the whole they seemed to be a happycouple. And yet she had some secret sorrow, this woman. She wouldoften be lost in deep thought, with the saddest look upon her face.More than once I have surprised her in tears. I have thoughtsometimes that it was the disposition of her child which weighed uponher mind, for I have never met so utterly spoiled and so ill-natureda little creature. He is small for his age, with a head which isquite disproportionately large. His whole life appears to be spent inan alternation between savage fits of passion and gloomy intervals ofsulking. Giving pain to any creature weaker than himself seems to behis one idea of amusement, and he shows quite remarkable talent inplanning the capture of mice, little birds, and insects. But I wouldrather not talk about the creature, Mr. Holmes, and, indeed, he haslittle to do with my story."
"I am glad of all details," remarked my friend, "whether they seem toyou to be relevant or not."
"I shall try not to miss anything of importance. The one unpleasantthing about the house, which struck me at once, was the appearanceand conduct of the servants. There are only two, a man and his wife.Toller, for that is his name, is a rough, uncouth man, with grizzledhair and whiskers, and a perpetual smell of drink. Twice since I havebeen with them he has been quite drunk, and yet Mr. Rucastle seemedto take no notice of it. His wife is a very tall and strong womanwith a sour face, as silent as Mrs. Rucastle and much less amiable.They are a most unpleasant couple, but fortunately I spend most of mytime in the nursery and my own room, which are next to each other inone corner of the building.
"For two days after my arrival at the Copper Beeches my life was veryquiet; on the third, Mrs. Rucastle came down just after breakfast andwhispered something to her husband.
"'Oh, yes,' said he, turning to me, 'we are very much obliged to you,Miss Hunter, for falling in with our whims so far as to cut yourhair. I assure you that it has not detracted in the tiniest iota fromyour appearance. We shall now see how the electric-blue dress willbecome you. You will find it laid out upon the bed in your room, andif you would be so good as to put it on we should both be extremelyobliged.'
"The dress which I found waiting for me was of a peculiar shade ofblue. It was of excellent material, a sort of beige, but it boreunmistakable signs of having been worn before. It could not have beena better fit if I had been measured for it. Both Mr. and Mrs.Rucastle expressed a delight at the look of it, which seemed quiteexaggerated in its vehemence. They were waiting for me in thedrawing-room, which is a very large room, stretching along the entirefront of the house, with three long windows reaching down to thefloor. A chair had been placed close to the central window, with itsback turned towards it. In this I was asked to sit, and then Mr.Rucastle, walking up and down on the other side of the room, began totell me a series of the funniest stories that I have ever listenedto. You cannot imagine how comical he was, and I laughed until I wasquite weary. Mrs. Rucastle, however, who has evidently no sense ofhumour, never so much as smiled, but sat with her hands in her lap,and a sad, anxious look upon her face. After an hour or so, Mr.Rucastle suddenly remarked that it was time to commence the duties ofthe day, and that I might change my dress and go to little Edward inthe nursery.
"Two days later this same performance was gone through under exactlysimilar circumstances. Again I changed my dress, again I sat in thewindow, and again I laughed very heartily at the funny stories ofwhich my employer had an immense rpertoire, and which he toldinimitably. Then he handed me a yellow-backed novel, and moving mychair a little sideways, that my own shadow might not fall upon thepage, he begged me to read aloud to him. I read for about tenminutes, beginning in the heart of a chapter, and then suddenly, inthe middle of a sentence, he ordered me to cease and to change mydress.
"You can easily imagine, Mr. Holmes, how curious I became as to whatthe meaning of this extraordinary performance could possibly be. Theywere always very careful, I observed, to turn my face away from thewindow, so that I became consumed with the desire to see what wasgoing on behind my back. At first it seemed to be impossible, but Isoon devised a means. My hand-mirror had been broken, so a happythought seized me, and I concealed a piece of the glass in myhandkerchief. On the next occasion, in the midst of my laughter, Iput my handkerchief up to my eyes, and was able with a littlemanagement to see all that there was behind me. I confess that I wasdisappointed. There was nothing. At least that was my firstimpression. At the second glance, however, I perceived that there wasa man standing in the Southampton Road, a small bearded man in a greysuit, who seemed to be looking in my direction. The road is animportant highway, and there are usually people there. This man,however, was leaning against the railings which bordered our fieldand was looking earnestly up. I lowered my handkerchief and glancedat Mrs. Rucastle to find her eyes fixed upon me with a most searchinggaze. She said nothing, but I am convinced that she had divined thatI had a mirror in my hand and had seen what was behind me. She roseat once.
"'Jephro,' said she, 'there is an impertinent fellow upon the roadthere who stares up at Miss Hunter.'
"'No friend of yours, Miss Hunter?' he asked.
"'No, I know no one in these parts.'
"'Dear me! How very impertinent! Kindly turn round and motion to himto go away.'
"'Surely it would be better to take no notice.'
"'No, no, we should have him loitering here always. Kindly turn roundand wave him away like that.'
"I did as I was told, and at the same instant Mrs. Rucastle drew downthe blind. That was a week ago, and from that time I have not satagain in the window, nor have I worn the blue dress, nor seen the manin the road."
"Pray continue," said Holmes. "Your narrative promises to be a mostinteresting one."
"You will find it rather disconnected, I fear, and there may prove tobe little relation between the different incidents of which I speak.On the very first day that I was at the Copper Beeches, Mr. Rucastletook me to a small outhouse which stands near the kitchen door. As weapproached it I heard the sharp rattling of a chain, and the sound asof a large animal moving about.
"'Look in here!' said Mr. Rucastle, showing me a slit between twoplanks. 'Is he not a beauty?'
"I looked through and was conscious of two glowing eyes, and of avague figure huddled up in the darkness.
"'Don't be frightened,' said my employer, laughing at the start whichI had given. 'It's only Carlo, my mastiff. I call him mine, butreally old Toller, my groom, is the only man who can do anything withhim. We feed him once a day, and not too much then, so that he isalways as keen as mustard. Toller lets him loose every night, and Godhelp the trespasser whom he lays his fangs upon. For goodness' sakedon't you ever on any pretext set your foot over the threshold atnight, for it's as much as your life is worth.'
"The warning was no idle one, for two nights later I happened to lookout of my bedroom window about two o'clock in the morning. It was abeautiful moonlight night, and the lawn in front of the house wassilvered over and almost as bright as day. I was standing, rapt inthe peaceful beauty of the scene, when I was aware that something wasmoving under the shadow of the copper beeches. As it emerged into themoonshine I saw what it was. It was a giant dog, as large as a calf,tawny tinted, with hanging jowl, black muzzle, and huge projectingbones. It walked slowly across the lawn and vanished into the shadowupon the other side. That dreadful sentinel sent a chill to my heartwhich I do not think that any burglar could have done.
"And now I have a very strange experience to tell you. I had, as youknow, cut off my hair in London, and I had placed it in a great coilat the bottom of my trunk. One evening, after the child was in bed, Ibegan to amuse myself by examining the furniture of my room and byrearranging my own little things. There was an old chest of drawersin the room, the two upper ones empty and open, the lower one locked.I had filled the first two with my linen, and as I had still much topack away I was naturally annoyed at not having the use of the thirddrawer. It struck me that it might have been fastened by a mereoversight, so I took out my bunch of keys and tried to open it. Thevery first key fitted to perfection, and I drew the drawer open.There was only one thing in it, but I am sure that you would neverguess what it was. It was my coil of hair.
"I took it up and examined it. It was of the same peculiar tint, andthe same thickness. But then the impossibility of the thing obtrudeditself upon me. How could my hair have been locked in the drawer?With trembling hands I undid my trunk, turned out the contents, anddrew from the bottom my own hair. I laid the two tresses together,and I assure you that they were identical. Was it not extraordinary?Puzzle as I would, I could make nothing at all of what it meant. Ireturned the strange hair to the drawer, and I said nothing of thematter to the Rucastles as I felt that I had put myself in the wrongby opening a drawer which they had locked.
"I am naturally observant, as you may have remarked, Mr. Holmes, andI soon had a pretty good plan of the whole house in my head. Therewas one wing, however, which appeared not to be inhabited at all. Adoor which faced that which led into the quarters of the Tollersopened into this suite, but it was invariably locked. One day,however, as I ascended the stair, I met Mr. Rucastle coming outthrough this door, his keys in his hand, and a look on his face whichmade him a very different person to the round, jovial man to whom Iwas accustomed. His cheeks were red, his brow was all crinkled withanger, and the veins stood out at his temples with passion. He lockedthe door and hurried past me without a word or a look.
"This aroused my curiosity, so when I went out for a walk in thegrounds with my charge, I strolled round to the side from which Icould see the windows of this part of the house. There were four ofthem in a row, three of which were simply dirty, while the fourth wasshuttered up. They were evidently all deserted. As I strolled up anddown, glancing at them occasionally, Mr. Rucastle came out to me,looking as merry and jovial as ever.
"'Ah!' said he, 'you must not think me rude if I passed you without aword, my dear young lady. I was preoccupied with business matters.'
"I assured him that I was not offended. 'By the way,' said I, 'youseem to have quite a suite of spare rooms up there, and one of themhas the shutters up.'
"He looked surprised and, as it seemed to me, a little startled at myremark.
"'Photography is one of my hobbies,' said he. 'I have made my darkroom up there. But, dear me! what an observant young lady we havecome upon. Who would have believed it? Who would have ever believedit?' He spoke in a jesting tone, but there was no jest in his eyes ashe looked at me. I read suspicion there and annoyance, but no jest.
"Well, Mr. Holmes, from the moment that I understood that there wassomething about that suite of rooms which I was not to know, I wasall on fire to go over them. It was not mere curiosity, though I havemy share of that. It was more a feeling of duty--a feeling that somegood might come from my penetrating to this place. They talk ofwoman's instinct; perhaps it was woman's instinct which gave me thatfeeling. At any rate, it was there, and I was keenly on the lookoutfor any chance to pass the forbidden door.
"It was only yesterday that the chance came. I may tell you that,besides Mr. Rucastle, both Toller and his wife find something to doin these deserted rooms, and I once saw him carrying a large blacklinen bag with him through the door. Recently he has been drinkinghard, and yesterday evening he was very drunk; and when I cameupstairs there was the key in the door. I have no doubt at all thathe had left it there. Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle were both downstairs, andthe child was with them, so that I had an admirable opportunity. Iturned the key gently in the lock, opened the door, and slippedthrough.
"There was a little passage in front of me, unpapered and uncarpeted,which turned at a right angle at the farther end. Round this cornerwere three doors in a line, the first and third of which were open.They each led into an empty room, dusty and cheerless, with twowindows in the one and one in the other, so thick with dirt that theevening light glimmered dimly through them. The centre door wasclosed, and across the outside of it had been fastened one of thebroad bars of an iron bed, padlocked at one end to a ring in thewall, and fastened at the other with stout cord. The door itself waslocked as well, and the key was not there. This barricaded doorcorresponded clearly with the shuttered window outside, and yet Icould see by the glimmer from beneath it that the room was not indarkness. Evidently there was a skylight which let in light fromabove. As I stood in the passage gazing at the sinister door andwondering what secret it might veil, I suddenly heard the sound ofsteps within the room and saw a shadow pass backward and forwardagainst the little slit of dim light which shone out from under thedoor. A mad, unreasoning terror rose up in me at the sight, Mr.Holmes. My overstrung nerves failed me suddenly, and I turned andran--ran as though some dreadful hand were behind me clutching at theskirt of my dress. I rushed down the passage, through the door, andstraight into the arms of Mr. Rucastle, who was waiting outside.
"'So,' said he, smiling, 'it was you, then. I thought that it must bewhen I saw the door open.'
"'Oh, I am so frightened!' I panted.
"'My dear young lady! my dear young lady!'--you cannot think howcaressing and soothing his manner was--'and what has frightened you,my dear young lady?'
"But his voice was just a little too coaxing. He overdid it. I waskeenly on my guard against him.
"'I was foolish enough to go into the empty wing,' I answered. 'Butit is so lonely and eerie in this dim light that I was frightened andran out again. Oh, it is so dreadfully still in there!'
"'Only that?' said he, looking at me keenly.
"'Why, what did you think?' I asked.
"'Why do you think that I lock this door?'
"'I am sure that I do not know.'
"'It is to keep people out who have no business there. Do you see?'He was still smiling in the most amiable manner.
"'I am sure if I had known--'
"'Well, then, you know now. And if you ever put your foot over thatthreshold again'--here in an instant the smile hardened into a grinof rage, and he glared down at me with the face of a demon--'I'llthrow you to the mastiff.'
"I was so terrified that I do not know what I did. I suppose that Imust have rushed past him into my room. I remember nothing until Ifound myself lying on my bed trembling all over. Then I thought ofyou, Mr. Holmes. I could not live there longer without some advice. Iwas frightened of the house, of the man, of the woman, of theservants, even of the child. They were all horrible to me. If I couldonly bring you down all would be well. Of course I might have fledfrom the house, but my curiosity was almost as strong as my fears. Mymind was soon made up. I would send you a wire. I put on my hat andcloak, went down to the office, which is about half a mile from thehouse, and then returned, feeling very much easier. A horrible doubtcame into my mind as I approached the door lest the dog might beloose, but I remembered that Toller had drunk himself into a state ofinsensibility that evening, and I knew that he was the only one inthe household who had any influence with the savage creature, or whowould venture to set him free. I slipped in in safety and lay awakehalf the night in my joy at the thought of seeing you. I had nodifficulty in getting leave to come into Winchester this morning, butI must be back before three o'clock, for Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle aregoing on a visit, and will be away all the evening, so that I mustlook after the child. Now I have told you all my adventures, Mr.Holmes, and I should be very glad if you could tell me what it allmeans, and, above all, what I should do."
Holmes and I had listened spellbound to this extraordinary story. Myfriend rose now and paced up and down the room, his hands in hispockets, and an expression of the most profound gravity upon hisface.
"Is Toller still drunk?" he asked.
"Yes. I heard his wife tell Mrs. Rucastle that she could do nothingwith him."
"That is well. And the Rucastles go out to-night?"
"Yes."
"Is there a cellar with a good strong lock?"
"Yes, the wine-cellar."
"You seem to me to have acted all through this matter like a verybrave and sensible girl, Miss Hunter. Do you think that you couldperform one more feat? I should not ask it of you if I did not thinkyou a quite exceptional woman."
"I will try. What is it?"
"We shall be at the Copper Beeches by seven o'clock, my friend and I.The Rucastles will be gone by that time, and Toller will, we hope, beincapable. There only remains Mrs. Toller, who might give the alarm.If you could send her into the cellar on some errand, and then turnthe key upon her, you would facilitate matters immensely."
"I will do it."
"Excellent! We shall then look thoroughly into the affair. Of coursethere is only one feasible explanation. You have been brought thereto personate someone, and the real person is imprisoned in thischamber. That is obvious. As to who this prisoner is, I have no doubtthat it is the daughter, Miss Alice Rucastle, if I remember right,who was said to have gone to America. You were chosen, doubtless, asresembling her in height, figure, and the colour of your hair. Hershad been cut off, very possibly in some illness through which she haspassed, and so, of course, yours had to be sacrificed also. By acurious chance you came upon her tresses. The man in the road wasundoubtedly some friend of hers--possibly her fianc--and no doubt,as you wore the girl's dress and were so like her, he was convincedfrom your laughter, whenever he saw you, and afterwards from yourgesture, that Miss Rucastle was perfectly happy, and that she nolonger desired his attentions. The dog is let loose at night toprevent him from endeavouring to communicate with her. So much isfairly clear. The most serious point in the case is the dispositionof the child."
"What on earth has that to do with it?" I ejaculated.
"My dear Watson, you as a medical man are continually gaining lightas to the tendencies of a child by the study of the parents. Don'tyou see that the converse is equally valid. I have frequently gainedmy first real insight into the character of parents by studying theirchildren. This child's disposition is abnormally cruel, merely forcruelty's sake, and whether he derives this from his smiling father,as I should suspect, or from his mother, it bodes evil for the poorgirl who is in their power."
"I am sure that you are right, Mr. Holmes," cried our client. "Athousand things come back to me which make me certain that you havehit it. Oh, let us lose not an instant in bringing help to this poorcreature."
"We must be circumspect, for we are dealing with a very cunning man.We can do nothing until seven o'clock. At that hour we shall be withyou, and it will not be long before we solve the mystery."
We were as good as our word, for it was just seven when we reachedthe Copper Beeches, having put up our trap at a wayside public-house.The group of trees, with their dark leaves shining like burnishedmetal in the light of the setting sun, were sufficient to mark thehouse even had Miss Hunter not been standing smiling on thedoor-step.
"Have you managed it?" asked Holmes.
A loud thudding noise came from somewhere downstairs. "That is Mrs.Toller in the cellar," said she. "Her husband lies snoring on thekitchen rug. Here are his keys, which are the duplicates of Mr.Rucastle's."
"You have done well indeed!" cried Holmes with enthusiasm. "Now leadthe way, and we shall soon see the end of this black business."
We passed up the stair, unlocked the door, followed on down apassage, and found ourselves in front of the barricade which MissHunter had described. Holmes cut the cord and removed the transversebar. Then he tried the various keys in the lock, but without success.No sound came from within, and at the silence Holmes' face cloudedover.
"I trust that we are not too late," said he. "I think, Miss Hunter,that we had better go in without you. Now, Watson, put your shoulderto it, and we shall see whether we cannot make our way in."
It was an old rickety door and gave at once before our unitedstrength. Together we rushed into the room. It was empty. There wasno furniture save a little pallet bed, a small table, and a basketfulof linen. The skylight above was open, and the prisoner gone.
"There has been some villainy here," said Holmes; "this beauty hasguessed Miss Hunter's intentions and has carried his victim off."
"But how?"
"Through the skylight. We shall soon see how he managed it." He swunghimself up onto the roof. "Ah, yes," he cried, "here's the end of along light ladder against the eaves. That is how he did it."
"But it is impossible," said Miss Hunter; "the ladder was not therewhen the Rucastles went away."
"He has come back and done it. I tell you that he is a clever anddangerous man. I should not be very much surprised if this were hewhose step I hear now upon the stair. I think, Watson, that it wouldbe as well for you to have your pistol ready."
The words were hardly out of his mouth before a man appeared at thedoor of the room, a very fat and burly man, with a heavy stick in hishand. Miss Hunter screamed and shrunk against the wall at the sightof him, but Sherlock Holmes sprang forward and confronted him.
"You villain!" said he, "where's your daughter?"
The fat man cast his eyes round, and then up at the open skylight.
"It is for me to ask you that," he shrieked, "you thieves! Spies andthieves! I have caught you, have I? You are in my power. I'll serveyou!" He turned and clattered down the stairs as hard as he could go.
"He's gone for the dog!" cried Miss Hunter.
"I have my revolver," said I.
"Better close the front door," cried Holmes, and we all rushed downthe stairs together. We had hardly reached the hall when we heard thebaying of a hound, and then a scream of agony, with a horribleworrying sound which it was dreadful to listen to. An elderly manwith a red face and shaking limbs came staggering out at a side door.
"My God!" he cried. "Someone has loosed the dog. It's not been fedfor two days. Quick, quick, or it'll be too late!"
Holmes and I rushed out and round the angle of the house, with Tollerhurrying behind us. There was the huge famished brute, its blackmuzzle buried in Rucastle's throat, while he writhed and screamedupon the ground. Running up, I blew its brains out, and it fell overwith its keen white teeth still meeting in the great creases of hisneck. With much labour we separated them and carried him, living buthorribly mangled, into the house. We laid him upon the drawing-roomsofa, and having dispatched the sobered Toller to bear the news tohis wife, I did what I could to relieve his pain. We were allassembled round him when the door opened, and a tall, gaunt womanentered the room.
"Mrs. Toller!" cried Miss Hunter.
"Yes, miss. Mr. Rucastle let me out when he came back before he wentup to you. Ah, miss, it is a pity you didn't let me know what youwere planning, for I would have told you that your pains werewasted."
"Ha!" said Holmes, looking keenly at her. "It is clear that Mrs.Toller knows more about this matter than anyone else."
"Yes, sir, I do, and I am ready enough to tell what I know."
"Then, pray, sit down, and let us hear it for there are severalpoints on which I must confess that I am still in the dark."
"I will soon make it clear to you," said she; "and I'd have done sobefore now if I could ha' got out from the cellar. If there'spolice-court business over this, you'll remember that I was the onethat stood your friend, and that I was Miss Alice's friend too.
"She was never happy at home, Miss Alice wasn't, from the time thather father married again. She was slighted like and had no say inanything, but it never really became bad for her until after she metMr. Fowler at a friend's house. As well as I could learn, Miss Alicehad rights of her own by will, but she was so quiet and patient, shewas, that she never said a word about them but just left everythingin Mr. Rucastle's hands. He knew he was safe with her; but when therewas a chance of a husband coming forward, who would ask for all thatthe law would give him, then her father thought it time to put a stopon it. He wanted her to sign a paper, so that whether she married ornot, he could use her money. When she wouldn't do it, he kept onworrying her until she got brain-fever, and for six weeks was atdeath's door. Then she got better at last, all worn to a shadow, andwith her beautiful hair cut off; but that didn't make no change inher young man, and he stuck to her as true as man could be."
"Ah," said Holmes, "I think that what you have been good enough totell us makes the matter fairly clear, and that I can deduce all thatremains. Mr. Rucastle then, I presume, took to this system ofimprisonment?"
"Yes, sir."
"And brought Miss Hunter down from London in order to get rid of thedisagreeable persistence of Mr. Fowler."
"That was it, sir."
"But Mr. Fowler being a persevering man, as a good seaman should be,blockaded the house, and having met you succeeded by certainarguments, metallic or otherwise, in convincing you that yourinterests were the same as his."
"Mr. Fowler was a very kind-spoken, free-handed gentleman," said Mrs.Toller serenely.
"And in this way he managed that your good man should have no want ofdrink, and that a ladder should be ready at the moment when yourmaster had gone out."
"You have it, sir, just as it happened."
"I am sure we owe you an apology, Mrs. Toller," said Holmes, "for youhave certainly cleared up everything which puzzled us. And here comesthe country surgeon and Mrs. Rucastle, so I think, Watson, that wehad best escort Miss Hunter back to Winchester, as it seems to methat our locus standi now is rather a questionable one."
And thus was solved the mystery of the sinister house with the copperbeeches in front of the door. Mr. Rucastle survived, but was always abroken man, kept alive solely through the care of his devoted wife.They still live with their old servants, who probably know so much ofRucastle's past life that he finds it difficult to part from them.Mr. Fowler and Miss Rucastle were married, by special license, inSouthampton the day after their flight, and he is now the holder of agovernment appointment in the island of Mauritius. As to Miss VioletHunter, my friend Holmes, rather to my disappointment, manifested nofurther interest in her when once she had ceased to be the centre ofone of his problems, and she is now the head of a private school atWalsall, where I believe that she has met with considerable success.





                    THE MEMOIRS OF SHERLOCK HOLMES




                             SILVER BLAZE
"I am afraid, Watson, that I shall have to go," said Holmes, as wesat down together to our breakfast one morning.
"Go! Where to?"
"To Dartmoor; to King's Pyland."
I was not surprised. Indeed, my only wonder was that he had notalready been mixed up in this extraordinary case, which was the onetopic of conversation through the length and breadth of England. Fora whole day my companion had rambled about the room with his chinupon his chest and his brows knitted, charging and recharging hispipe with the strongest black tobacco, and absolutely deaf to any ofmy questions or remarks. Fresh editions of every paper had been sentup by our news agent, only to be glanced over and tossed down into acorner. Yet, silent as he was, I knew perfectly well what it was overwhich he was brooding.  There was but one problem before the publicwhich could challenge his powers of analysis, and that was thesingular disappearance of the favorite for the Wessex Cup, and thetragic murder of its trainer. When, therefore, he suddenly announcedhis intention of setting out for the scene of the drama it was onlywhat I had both expected and hoped for.
"I should be most happy to go down with you if I should not be in theway," said I.
"My dear Watson, you would confer a great favour upon me by coming.And I think that your time will not be misspent, for there are pointsabout the case which promise to make it an absolutely unique one. Wehave, I think, just time to catch our train at Paddington, and I willgo further into the matter upon our journey. You would oblige me bybringing with you your very excellent field-glass."
And so it happened that an hour or so later I found myself in thecorner of a first-class carriage flying along en route for Exeter,while Sherlock Holmes, with his sharp, eager face framed in hisear-flapped travelling-cap, dipped rapidly into the bundle of freshpapers which he had procured at Paddington. We had left Reading farbehind us before he thrust the last one of them under the seat, andoffered me his cigar-case.
"We are going well," said he, looking out the window and glancing athis watch. "Our rate at present is fifty-three and a half miles anhour."
"I have not observed the quarter-mile posts," said I.
"Nor have I. But the telegraph posts upon this line are sixty yardsapart, and the calculation is a simple one. I presume that you havelooked into this matter of the murder of John Straker and thedisappearance of Silver Blaze?"
"I have seen what the Telegraph and the Chronicle have to say."
"It is one of those cases where the art of the reasoner should beused rather for the sifting of details than for the acquiring offresh evidence. The tragedy has been so uncommon, so complete and ofsuch personal importance to so many people, that we are sufferingfrom a plethora of surmise, conjecture, and hypothesis. Thedifficulty is to detach the framework of fact--of absolute undeniablefact--from the embellishments of theorists and reporters. Then,having established ourselves upon this sound basis, it is our duty tosee what inferences may be drawn and what are the special points uponwhich the whole mystery turns. On Tuesday evening I receivedtelegrams from both Colonel Ross, the owner of the horse, and fromInspector Gregory, who is looking after the case, inviting mycooperation.
"Tuesday evening!" I exclaimed. "And this is Thursday morning. Whydidn't you go down yesterday?"
"Because I made a blunder, my dear Watson--which is, I am afraid, amore common occurrence than any one would think who only knew methrough your memoirs. The fact is that I could not believe itpossible that the most remarkable horse in England could long remainconcealed, especially in so sparsely inhabited a place as the northof Dartmoor. From hour to hour yesterday I expected to hear that hehad been found, and that his abductor was the murderer of JohnStraker. When, however, another morning had come, and I found thatbeyond the arrest of young Fitzroy Simpson nothing had been done, Ifelt that it was time for me to take action. Yet in some ways I feelthat yesterday has not been wasted."
"You have formed a theory, then?"
"At least I have got a grip of the essential facts of the case. Ishall enumerate them to you, for nothing clears up a case so much asstating it to another person, and I can hardly expect yourco-operation if I do not show you the position from which we start."
I lay back against the cushions, puffing at my cigar, while Holmes,leaning forward, with his long, thin forefinger checking off thepoints upon the palm of his left hand, gave me a sketch of the eventswhich had led to our journey.
"Silver Blaze," said he, "is from the Somomy stock, and holds asbrilliant a record as his famous ancestor. He is now in his fifthyear, and has brought in turn each of the prizes of the turf toColonel Ross, his fortunate owner. Up to the time of the catastrophehe was the first favorite for the Wessex Cup, the betting being threeto one on him. He has always, however, been a prime favorite with theracing public, and has never yet disappointed them, so that even atthose odds enormous sums of money have been laid upon him. It isobvious, therefore, that there were many people who had the strongestinterest in preventing Silver Blaze from being there at the fall ofthe flag next Tuesday.
"The fact was, of course, appreciated at King's Pyland, where theColonel's training-stable is situated. Every precaution was taken toguard the favorite. The trainer, John Straker, is a retired jockeywho rode in Colonel Ross's colors before he became too heavy for theweighing-chair. He has served the Colonel for five years as jockeyand for seven as trainer, and has always shown himself to be azealous and honest servant. Under him were three lads; for theestablishment was a small one, containing only four horses in all.One of these lads sat up each night in the stable, while the othersslept in the loft. All three bore excellent characters. John Straker,who is a married man, lived in a small villa about two hundred yardsfrom the stables. He has no children, keeps one maid-servant, and iscomfortably off. The country round is very lonely, but about half amile to the north there is a small cluster of villas which have beenbuilt by a Tavistock contractor for the use of invalids and otherswho may wish to enjoy the pure Dartmoor air. Tavistock itself liestwo miles to the west, while across the moor, also about two milesdistant, is the larger training establishment of Mapleton, whichbelongs to Lord Backwater, and is managed by Silas Brown. In everyother direction the moor is a complete wilderness, inhabited only bya few roaming gypsies. Such was the general situation last Mondaynight when the catastrophe occurred.
"On that evening the horses had been exercised and watered as usual,and the stables were locked up at nine o'clock. Two of the ladswalked up to the trainer's house, where they had supper in thekitchen, while the third, Ned Hunter, remained on guard. At a fewminutes after nine the maid, Edith Baxter, carried down to thestables his supper, which consisted of a dish of curried mutton. Shetook no liquid, as there was a water-tap in the stables, and it wasthe rule that the lad on duty should drink nothing else. The maidcarried a lantern with her, as it was very dark and the path ranacross the open moor.
"Edith Baxter was within thirty yards of the stables, when a manappeared out of the darkness and called to her to stop. As he steppedinto the circle of yellow light thrown by the lantern she saw that hewas a person of gentlemanly bearing, dressed in a gray suit oftweeds, with a cloth cap. He wore gaiters, and carried a heavy stickwith a knob to it. She was most impressed, however, by the extremepallor of his face and by the nervousness of his manner. His age, shethought, would be rather over thirty than under it.
"'Can you tell me where I am?' he asked. 'I had almost made up mymind to sleep on the moor, when I saw the light of your lantern.'
"'You are close to the King's Pyland training-stables,' said she.
"'Oh, indeed! What a stroke of luck!' he cried. 'I understand that astable-boy sleeps there alone every night. Perhaps that is his supperwhich you are carrying to him. Now I am sure that you would not betoo proud to earn the price of a new dress, would you?' He took apiece of white paper folded up out of his waistcoat pocket. 'See thatthe boy has this to-night, and you shall have the prettiest frockthat money can buy.'
"She was frightened by the earnestness of his manner, and ran pasthim to the window through which she was accustomed to hand the meals.It was already opened, and Hunter was seated at the small tableinside. She had begun to tell him of what had happened, when thestranger came up again.
"'Good-evening,' said he, looking through the window. 'I wanted tohave a word with you.' The girl has sworn that as he spoke shenoticed the corner of the little paper packet protruding from hisclosed hand.
"'What business have you here?' asked the lad.
"'It's business that may put something into your pocket,' said theother. 'You've two horses in for the Wessex Cup--Silver Blaze andBayard. Let me have the straight tip and you won't be a loser. Is ita fact that at the weights Bayard could give the other a hundredyards in five furlongs, and that the stable have put their money onhim?'
"'So, you're one of those damned touts!' cried the lad. 'I'll showyou how we serve them in King's Pyland.' He sprang up and rushedacross the stable to unloose the dog. The girl fled away to thehouse, but as she ran she looked back and saw that the stranger wasleaning through the window. A minute later, however, when Hunterrushed out with the hound he was gone, and though he ran all roundthe buildings he failed to find any trace of him."
"One moment," I asked. "Did the stable-boy, when he ran out with thedog, leave the door unlocked behind him?"
"Excellent, Watson, excellent!" murmured my companion. "Theimportance of the point struck me so forcibly that I sent a specialwire to Dartmoor yesterday to clear the matter up. The boy locked thedoor before he left it. The window, I may add, was not large enoughfor a man to get through.
"Hunter waited until his fellow-grooms had returned, when he sent amessage to the trainer and told him what had occurred. Straker wasexcited at hearing the account, although he does not seem to havequite realized its true significance. It left him, however, vaguelyuneasy, and Mrs. Straker, waking at one in the morning, found that hewas dressing. In reply to her inquiries, he said that he could notsleep on account of his anxiety about the horses, and that heintended to walk down to the stables to see that all was well. Shebegged him to remain at home, as she could hear the rain patteringagainst the window, but in spite of her entreaties he pulled on hislarge mackintosh and left the house.
"Mrs. Straker awoke at seven in the morning, to find that her husbandhad not yet returned. She dressed herself hastily, called the maid,and set off for the stables. The door was open; inside, huddledtogether upon a chair, Hunter was sunk in a state of absolute stupor,the favorite's stall was empty, and there were no signs of histrainer.
"The two lads who slept in the chaff-cutting loft above theharness-room were quickly aroused. They had heard nothing during thenight, for they are both sound sleepers. Hunter was obviously underthe influence of some powerful drug, and as no sense could be got outof him, he was left to sleep it off while the two lads and the twowomen ran out in search of the absentees. They still had hopes thatthe trainer had for some reason taken out the horse for earlyexercise, but on ascending the knoll near the house, from which allthe neighboring moors were visible, they not only could see no signsof the missing favorite, but they perceived something which warnedthem that they were in the presence of a tragedy.
"About a quarter of a mile from the stables John Straker's overcoatwas flapping from a furze-bush. Immediately beyond there was abowl-shaped depression in the moor, and at the bottom of this wasfound the dead body of the unfortunate trainer. His head had beenshattered by a savage blow from some heavy weapon, and he was woundedon the thigh, where there was a long, clean cut, inflicted evidentlyby some very sharp instrument. It was clear, however, that Strakerhad defended himself vigorously against his assailants, for in hisright hand he held a small knife, which was clotted with blood up tothe handle, while in his left he clasped a red and black silk cravat,which was recognized by the maid as having been worn on the precedingevening by the stranger who had visited the stables. Hunter, onrecovering from his stupor, was also quite positive as to theownership of the cravat. He was equally certain that the samestranger had, while standing at the window, drugged his curriedmutton, and so deprived the stables of their watchman. As to themissing horse, there were abundant proofs in the mud which lay at thebottom of the fatal hollow that he had been there at the time of thestruggle. But from that morning he has disappeared, and although alarge reward has been offered, and all the gypsies of Dartmoor are onthe alert, no news has come of him. Finally, an analysis has shownthat the remains of his supper left by the stable-lad contain anappreciable quantity of powdered opium, while the people at the housepartook of the same dish on the same night without any ill effect.
"Those are the main facts of the case, stripped of all surmise, andstated as baldly as possible. I shall now recapitulate what thepolice have done in the matter.
"Inspector Gregory, to whom the case has been committed, is anextremely competent officer. Were he but gifted with imagination hemight rise to great heights in his profession. On his arrival hepromptly found and arrested the man upon whom suspicion naturallyrested. There was little difficulty in finding him, for he inhabitedone of those villas which I have mentioned. His name, it appears, wasFitzroy Simpson. He was a man of excellent birth and education, whohad squandered a fortune upon the turf, and who lived now by doing alittle quiet and genteel book-making in the sporting clubs of London.An examination of his betting-book shows that bets to the amount offive thousand pounds had been registered by him against the favorite.On being arrested he volunteered the statement that he had come downto Dartmoor in the hope of getting some information about the King'sPyland horses, and also about Desborough, the second favorite, whichwas in charge of Silas Brown at the Mapleton stables. He did notattempt to deny that he had acted as described upon the eveningbefore, but declared that he had no sinister designs, and had simplywished to obtain first-hand information. When confronted with hiscravat, he turned very pale, and was utterly unable to account forits presence in the hand of the murdered man. His wet clothing showedthat he had been out in the storm of the night before, and his stick,which was a Penang-lawyer weighted with lead, was just such a weaponas might, by repeated blows, have inflicted the terrible injuries towhich the trainer had succumbed. On the other hand, there was nowound upon his person, while the state of Straker's knife would showthat one at least of his assailants must bear his mark upon him.There you have it all in a nutshell, Watson, and if you can give meany light I shall be infinitely obliged to you."
I had listened with the greatest interest to the statement whichHolmes, with characteristic clearness, had laid before me. Thoughmost of the facts were familiar to me, I had not sufficientlyappreciated their relative importance, nor their connection to eachother.
"Is in not possible," I suggested, "that the incised wound uponStraker may have been caused by his own knife in the convulsivestruggles which follow any brain injury?"
"It is more than possible; it is probable," said Holmes. "In thatcase one of the main points in favor of the accused disappears."
"And yet," said I, "even now I fail to understand what the theory ofthe police can be."
"I am afraid that whatever theory we state has very grave objectionsto it," returned my companion. "The police imagine, I take it, thatthis Fitzroy Simpson, having drugged the lad, and having in some wayobtained a duplicate key, opened the stable door and took out thehorse, with the intention, apparently, of kidnapping him altogether.His bridle is missing, so that Simpson must have put this on. Then,having left the door open behind him, he was leading the horse awayover the moor, when he was either met or overtaken by the trainer. Arow naturally ensued. Simpson beat out the trainer's brains with hisheavy stick without receiving any injury from the small knife whichStraker used in self-defence, and then the thief either led the horseon to some secret hiding-place, or else it may have bolted during thestruggle, and be now wandering out on the moors. That is the case asit appears to the police, and improbable as it is, all otherexplanations are more improbable still. However, I shall very quicklytest the matter when I am once upon the spot, and until then I cannotreally see how we can get much further than our present position."
It was evening before we reached the little town of Tavistock, whichlies, like the boss of a shield, in the middle of the huge circle ofDartmoor. Two gentlemen were awaiting us in the station--the one atall, fair man with lion-like hair and beard and curiouslypenetrating light blue eyes; the other a small, alert person, veryneat and dapper, in a frock-coat and gaiters, with trim littleside-whiskers and an eye-glass. The latter was Colonel Ross, thewell-known sportsman; the other, Inspector Gregory, a man who wasrapidly making his name in the English detective service.
"I am delighted that you have come down, Mr. Holmes," said theColonel. "The Inspector here has done all that could possibly besuggested, but I wish to leave no stone unturned in trying to avengepoor Straker and in recovering my horse."
"Have there been any fresh developments?" asked Holmes.
"I am sorry to say that we have made very little progress," said theInspector. "We have an open carriage outside, and as you would nodoubt like to see the place before the light fails, we might talk itover as we drive."
A minute later we were all seated in a comfortable landau, and wererattling through the quaint old Devonshire city. Inspector Gregorywas full of his case, and poured out a stream of remarks, whileHolmes threw in an occasional question or interjection. Colonel Rossleaned back with his arms folded and his hat tilted over his eyes,while I listened with interest to the dialogue of the two detectives.Gregory was formulating his theory, which was almost exactly whatHolmes had foretold in the train.
"The net is drawn pretty close round Fitzroy Simpson," he remarked,"and I believe myself that he is our man. At the same time Irecognize that the evidence is purely circumstantial, and that somenew development may upset it."
"How about Straker's knife?"
"We have quite come to the conclusion that he wounded himself in hisfall."
"My friend Dr. Watson made that suggestion to me as we came down. Ifso, it would tell against this man Simpson."
"Undoubtedly. He has neither a knife nor any sign of a wound. Theevidence against him is certainly very strong. He had a greatinterest in the disappearance of the favorite. He lies undersuspicion of having poisoned the stable-boy, he was undoubtedly outin the storm, he was armed with a heavy stick, and his cravat wasfound in the dead man's hand. I really think we have enough to gobefore a jury."
Holmes shook his head. "A clever counsel would tear it all to rags,"said he. "Why should he take the horse out of the stable? If hewished to injure it why could he not do it there? Has a duplicate keybeen found in his possession? What chemist sold him the powderedopium? Above all, where could he, a stranger to the district, hide ahorse, and such a horse as this? What is his own explanation as tothe paper which he wished the maid to give to the stable-boy?"
"He says that it was a ten-pound note. One was found in his purse.But your other difficulties are not so formidable as they seem. He isnot a stranger to the district. He has twice lodged at Tavistock inthe summer. The opium was probably brought from London. The key,having served its purpose, would be hurled away. The horse may be atthe bottom of one of the pits or old mines upon the moor."
"What does he say about the cravat?"
"He acknowledges that it is his, and declares that he had lost it.But a new element has been introduced into the case which may accountfor his leading the horse from the stable."
Holmes pricked up his ears.
"We have found traces which show that a party of gypsies encamped onMonday night within a mile of the spot where the murder took place.On Tuesday they were gone. Now, presuming that there was someunderstanding between Simpson and these gypsies, might he not havebeen leading the horse to them when he was overtaken, and may theynot have him now?"
"It is certainly possible."
"The moor is being scoured for these gypsies. I have also examinedevery stable and out-house in Tavistock, and for a radius of tenmiles."
"There is another training-stable quite close, I understand?"
"Yes, and that is a factor which we must certainly not neglect. AsDesborough, their horse, was second in the betting, they had aninterest in the disappearance of the favorite. Silas Brown, thetrainer, is known to have had large bets upon the event, and he wasno friend to poor Straker. We have, however, examined the stables,and there is nothing to connect him with the affair."
"And nothing to connect this man Simpson with the interests of theMapleton stables?"
"Nothing at all."
Holmes leaned back in the carriage, and the conversation ceased. Afew minutes later our driver pulled up at a neat little red-brickvilla with overhanging eaves which stood by the road. Some distanceoff, across a paddock, lay a long gray-tiled out-building. In everyother direction the low curves of the moor, bronze-colored from thefading ferns, stretched away to the sky-line, broken only by thesteeples of Tavistock, and by a cluster of houses away to thewestward which marked the Mapleton stables. We all sprang out withthe exception of Holmes, who continued to lean back with his eyesfixed upon the sky in front of him, entirely absorbed in his ownthoughts. It was only when I touched his arm that he roused himselfwith a violent start and stepped out of the carriage.
"Excuse me," said he, turning to Colonel Ross, who had looked at himin some surprise. "I was day-dreaming." There was a gleam in his eyesand a suppressed excitement in his manner which convinced me, used asI was to his ways, that his hand was upon a clue, though I could notimagine where he had found it.
"Perhaps you would prefer at once to go on to the scene of the crime,Mr. Holmes?" said Gregory.
"I think that I should prefer to stay here a little and go into oneor two questions of detail. Straker was brought back here, Ipresume?"
"Yes; he lies upstairs. The inquest is to-morrow."
"He has been in your service some years, Colonel Ross?"
"I have always found him an excellent servant."
"I presume that you made an inventory of what he had in this pocketsat the time of his death, Inspector?"
"I have the things themselves in the sitting-room, if you would careto see them."
"I should be very glad." We all filed into the front room and satround the central table while the Inspector unlocked a square tin boxand laid a small heap of things before us. There was a box of vestas,two inches of tallow candle, an A D P brier-root pipe, a pouch ofseal-skin with half an ounce of long-cut Cavendish, a silver watchwith a gold chain, five sovereigns in gold, an aluminum pencil-case,a few papers, and an ivory-handled knife with a very delicate,inflexible blade marked Weiss & Co., London.
"This is a very singular knife," said Holmes, lifting it up andexamining it minutely. "I presume, as I see blood-stains upon it,that it is the one which was found in the dead man's grasp. Watson,this knife is surely in your line?"
"It is what we call a cataract knife," said I.
"I thought so. A very delicate blade devised for very delicate work.A strange thing for a man to carry with him upon a rough expedition,especially as it would not shut in his pocket."
"The tip was guarded by a disk of cork which we found beside hisbody," said the Inspector. "His wife tells us that the knife had lainupon the dressing-table, and that he had picked it up as he left theroom. It was a poor weapon, but perhaps the best that he could layhis hands on at the moment."
"Very possible. How about these papers?"
"Three of them are receipted hay-dealers' accounts. One of them is aletter of instructions from Colonel Ross. This other is a milliner'saccount for thirty-seven pounds fifteen made out by Madame Lesurier,of Bond Street, to William Derbyshire. Mrs. Straker tells us thatDerbyshire was a friend of her husband's and that occasionally hisletters were addressed here."
"Madam Derbyshire had somewhat expensive tastes," remarked Holmes,glancing down the account. "Twenty-two guineas is rather heavy for asingle costume. However there appears to be nothing more to learn,and we may now go down to the scene of the crime."
As we emerged from the sitting-room a woman, who had been waiting inthe passage, took a step forward and laid her hand upon theInspector's sleeve. Her face was haggard and thin and eager, stampedwith the print of a recent horror.
"Have you got them? Have you found them?" she panted.
"No, Mrs. Straker. But Mr. Holmes here has come from London to helpus, and we shall do all that is possible."
"Surely I met you in Plymouth at a garden-party some little time ago,Mrs. Straker?" said Holmes.
"No, sir; you are mistaken."
"Dear me! Why, I could have sworn to it. You wore a costume ofdove-colored silk with ostrich-feather trimming."
"I never had such a dress, sir," answered the lady.
"Ah, that quite settles it," said Holmes. And with an apology hefollowed the Inspector outside. A short walk across the moor took usto the hollow in which the body had been found. At the brink of itwas the furze-bush upon which the coat had been hung.
"There was no wind that night, I understand," said Holmes.
"None; but very heavy rain."
"In that case the overcoat was not blown against the furze-bush, butplaced there."
"Yes, it was laid across the bush."
"You fill me with interest, I perceive that the ground has beentrampled up a good deal. No doubt many feet have been here sinceMonday night."
"A piece of matting has been laid here at the side, and we have allstood upon that."
"Excellent."
"In this bag I have one of the boots which Straker wore, one ofFitzroy Simpson's shoes, and a cast horseshoe of Silver Blaze."
"My dear Inspector, you surpass yourself!" Holmes took the bag, and,descending into the hollow, he pushed the matting into a more centralposition. Then stretching himself upon his face and leaning his chinupon his hands, he made a careful study of the trampled mud in frontof him. "Hullo!" said he, suddenly. "What's this?" It was a wax vestahalf burned, which was so coated with mud that it looked at firstlike a little chip of wood.
"I cannot think how I came to overlook it," said the Inspector, withan expression of annoyance.
"It was invisible, buried in the mud. I only saw it because I waslooking for it."
"What! You expected to find it?"
"I thought it not unlikely."
He took the boots from the bag, and compared the impressions of eachof them with marks upon the ground. Then he clambered up to the rimof the hollow, and crawled about among the ferns and bushes.
"I am afraid that there are no more tracks," said the Inspector. "Ihave examined the ground very carefully for a hundred yards in eachdirection."
"Indeed!" said Holmes, rising. "I should not have the impertinence todo it again after what you say. But I should like to take a littlewalk over the moor before it grows dark, that I may know my groundto-morrow, and I think that I shall put this horseshoe into my pocketfor luck."
Colonel Ross, who had shown some signs of impatience at mycompanion's quiet and systematic method of work, glanced at hiswatch. "I wish you would come back with me, Inspector," said he."There are several points on which I should like your advice, andespecially as to whether we do not owe it to the public to remove ourhorse's name from the entries for the Cup."
"Certainly not," cried Holmes, with decision. "I should let the namestand."
The Colonel bowed. "I am very glad to have had your opinion, sir,"said he. "You will find us at poor Straker's house when you havefinished your walk, and we can drive together into Tavistock."
He turned back with the Inspector, while Holmes and I walked slowlyacross the moor. The sun was beginning to sink behind the stables ofMapleton, and the long, sloping plain in front of us was tinged withgold, deepening into rich, ruddy browns where the faded ferns andbrambles caught the evening light. But the glories of the landscapewere all wasted upon my companion, who was sunk in the deepestthought.
"It's this way, Watson," said he at last. "We may leave the questionof who killed John Straker for the instant, and confine ourselves tofinding out what has become of the horse. Now, supposing that hebroke away during or after the tragedy, where could he have gone to?The horse is a very gregarious creature. If left to himself hisinstincts would have been either to return to King's Pyland or goover to Mapleton. Why should he run wild upon the moor? He wouldsurely have been seen by now. And why should gypsies kidnap him?These people always clear out when they hear of trouble, for they donot wish to be pestered by the police. They could not hope to sellsuch a horse. They would run a great risk and gain nothing by takinghim. Surely that is clear."
"Where is he, then?"
"I have already said that he must have gone to King's Pyland or toMapleton. He is not at King's Pyland. Therefore he is at Mapleton.Let us take that as a working hypothesis and see what it leads us to.This part of the moor, as the Inspector remarked, is very hard anddry. But it falls away towards Mapleton, and you can see from herethat there is a long hollow over yonder, which must have been verywet on Monday night. If our supposition is correct, then the horsemust have crossed that, and there is the point where we should lookfor his tracks."
We had been walking briskly during this conversation, and a few moreminutes brought us to the hollow in question. At Holmes' request Iwalked down the bank to the right, and he to the left, but I had nottaken fifty paces before I heard him give a shout, and saw him wavinghis hand to me. The track of a horse was plainly outlined in the softearth in front of him, and the shoe which he took from his pocketexactly fitted the impression.
"See the value of imagination," said Holmes. "It is the one qualitywhich Gregory lacks. We imagined what might have happened, acted uponthe supposition, and find ourselves justified. Let us proceed."
We crossed the marshy bottom and passed over a quarter of a mile ofdry, hard turf. Again the ground sloped, and again we came on thetracks. Then we lost them for half a mile, but only to pick them uponce more quite close to Mapleton. It was Holmes who saw them first,and he stood pointing with a look of triumph upon his face. A man'strack was visible beside the horse's.
"The horse was alone before," I cried.
"Quite so. It was alone before. Hullo, what is this?"
The double track turned sharp off and took the direction of King'sPyland. Holmes whistled, and we both followed along after it. Hiseyes were on the trail, but I happened to look a little to one side,and saw to my surprise the same tracks coming back again in theopposite direction.
"One for you, Watson," said Holmes, when I pointed it out. "You havesaved us a long walk, which would have brought us back on our owntraces. Let us follow the return track."
We had not to go far. It ended at the paving of asphalt which led upto the gates of the Mapleton stables. As we approached, a groom ranout from them.
"We don't want any loiterers about here," said he.
"I only wished to ask a question," said Holmes, with his finger andthumb in his waistcoat pocket. "Should I be too early to see yourmaster, Mr. Silas Brown, if I were to call at five o'clock to-morrowmorning?"
"Bless you, sir, if any one is about he will be, for he is always thefirst stirring. But here he is, sir, to answer your questions forhimself. No, sir, no; it is as much as my place is worth to let himsee me touch your money. Afterwards, if you like."
As Sherlock Holmes replaced the half-crown which he had drawn fromhis pocket, a fierce-looking elderly man strode out from the gatewith a hunting-crop swinging in his hand.
"What's this, Dawson!" he cried. "No gossiping! Go about yourbusiness! And you, what the devil do you want here?"
"Ten minutes' talk with you, my good sir," said Holmes in thesweetest of voices.
"I've no time to talk to every gadabout. We want no stranger here. Beoff, or you may find a dog at your heels."
Holmes leaned forward and whispered something in the trainer's ear.He started violently and flushed to the temples.
"It's a lie!" he shouted, "an infernal lie!"
"Very good. Shall we argue about it here in public or talk it over inyour parlor?"
"Oh, come in if you wish to."
Holmes smiled. "I shall not keep you more than a few minutes,Watson," said he. "Now, Mr. Brown, I am quite at your disposal."
It was twenty minutes, and the reds had all faded into grays beforeHolmes and the trainer reappeared. Never have I seen such a change ashad been brought about in Silas Brown in that short time. His facewas ashy pale, beads of perspiration shone upon his brow, and hishands shook until the hunting-crop wagged like a branch in the wind.His bullying, overbearing manner was all gone too, and he cringedalong at my companion's side like a dog with its master.
"Your instructions will be done. It shall all be done," said he.
"There must be no mistake," said Holmes, looking round at him. Theother winced as he read the menace in his eyes.
"Oh no, there shall be no mistake. It shall be there. Should I changeit first or not?"
Holmes thought a little and then burst out laughing. "No, don't,"said he; "I shall write to you about it. No tricks, now, or--"
"Oh, you can trust me, you can trust me!"
"Yes, I think I can. Well, you shall hear from me to-morrow." Heturned upon his heel, disregarding the trembling hand which the otherheld out to him, and we set off for King's Pyland.
"A more perfect compound of the bully, coward, and sneak than MasterSilas Brown I have seldom met with," remarked Holmes as we trudgedalong together.
"He has the horse, then?"
"He tried to bluster out of it, but I described to him so exactlywhat his actions had been upon that morning that he is convinced thatI was watching him. Of course you observed the peculiarly square toesin the impressions, and that his own boots exactly corresponded tothem. Again, of course no subordinate would have dared to do such athing. I described to him how, when according to his custom he wasthe first down, he perceived a strange horse wandering over the moor.How he went out to it, and his astonishment at recognizing, from thewhite forehead which has given the favorite its name, that chance hadput in his power the only horse which could beat the one upon whichhe had put his money. Then I described how his first impulse had beento lead him back to King's Pyland, and how the devil had shown himhow he could hide the horse until the race was over, and how he hadled it back and concealed it at Mapleton. When I told him everydetail he gave it up and thought only of saving his own skin."
"But his stables had been searched?"
"Oh, and old horse-faker like him has many a dodge."
"But are you not afraid to leave the horse in his power now, since hehas every interest in injuring it?"
"My dear fellow, he will guard it as the apple of his eye. He knowsthat his only hope of mercy is to produce it safe."
"Colonel Ross did not impress me as a man who would be likely to showmuch mercy in any case."
"The matter does not rest with Colonel Ross. I follow my own methods,and tell as much or as little as I choose. That is the advantage ofbeing unofficial. I don't know whether you observed it, Watson, butthe Colonel's manner has been just a trifle cavalier to me. I aminclined now to have a little amusement at his expense. Say nothingto him about the horse."
"Certainly not without your permission."
"And of course this is all quite a minor point compared to thequestion of who killed John Straker."
"And you will devote yourself to that?"
"On the contrary, we both go back to London by the night train."
I was thunderstruck by my friend's words. We had only been a fewhours in Devonshire, and that he should give up an investigationwhich he had begun so brilliantly was quite incomprehensible to me.Not a word more could I draw from him until we were back at thetrainer's house. The Colonel and the Inspector were awaiting us inthe parlor.
"My friend and I return to town by the night-express," said Holmes."We have had a charming little breath of your beautiful Dartmoorair."
The Inspector opened his eyes, and the Colonel's lip curled in asneer.
"So you despair of arresting the murderer of poor Straker," said he.
Holmes shrugged his shoulders. "There are certainly gravedifficulties in the way," said he. "I have every hope, however, thatyour horse will start upon Tuesday, and I beg that you will have yourjockey in readiness. Might I ask for a photograph of Mr. JohnStraker?"
The Inspector took one from an envelope and handed it to him.
"My dear Gregory, you anticipate all my wants. If I might ask you towait here for an instant, I have a question which I should like toput to the maid."
"I must say that I am rather disappointed in our London consultant,"said Colonel Ross, bluntly, as my friend left the room. "I do not seethat we are any further than when he came."
"At least you have his assurance that your horse will run," said I.
"Yes, I have his assurance," said the Colonel, with a shrug of hisshoulders. "I should prefer to have the horse."
I was about to make some reply in defence of my friend when heentered the room again.
"Now, gentlemen," said he, "I am quite ready for Tavistock."
As we stepped into the carriage one of the stable-lads held the dooropen for us. A sudden idea seemed to occur to Holmes, for he leanedforward and touched the lad upon the sleeve.
"You have a few sheep in the paddock," he said. "Who attends tothem?"
"I do, sir."
"Have you noticed anything amiss with them of late?"
"Well, sir, not of much account; but three of them have gone lame,sir."
I could see that Holmes was extremely pleased, for he chuckled andrubbed his hands together.
"A long shot, Watson; a very long shot," said he, pinching my arm."Gregory, let me recommend to your attention this singular epidemicamong the sheep. Drive on, coachman!"
Colonel Ross still wore an expression which showed the poor opinionwhich he had formed of my companion's ability, but I saw by theInspector's face that his attention had been keenly aroused.
"You consider that to be important?" he asked.
"Exceedingly so."
"Is there any point to which you would wish to draw my attention?"
"To the curious incident of the dog in the night-time."
"The dog did nothing in the night-time."
"That was the curious incident," remarked Sherlock Holmes.
Four days later Holmes and I were again in the train, bound forWinchester to see the race for the Wessex Cup. Colonel Ross met us byappointment outside the station, and we drove in his drag to thecourse beyond the town. His face was grave, and his manner was coldin the extreme.
"I have seen nothing of my horse," said he.
"I suppose that you would know him when you saw him?" asked Holmes.
The Colonel was very angry. "I have been on the turf for twentyyears, and never was asked such a question as that before," said he."A child would know Silver Blaze, with his white forehead and hismottled off-foreleg."
"How is the betting?"
"Well, that is the curious part of it. You could have got fifteen toone yesterday, but the price has become shorter and shorter, untilyou can hardly get three to one now."
"Hum!" said Holmes. "Somebody knows something, that is clear."
As the drag drew up in the enclosure near the grand stand I glancedat the card to see the entries.
Wessex Plate [it ran] 50 sovs. each h ft with 1000 sovs. added, forfour and five year olds. Second, 300. Third, 200. New course (onemile and five furlongs).1. Mr. Heath Newton's The Negro. Red cap. Cinnamon jacket.2. Colonel Wardlaw's Pugilist. Pink cap. Blue and black jacket.3. Lord Backwater's Desborough. Yellow cap and sleeves.4. Colonel Ross's Silver Blaze. Black cap. Red jacket.5. Duke of Balmoral's Iris. Yellow and black stripes.6. Lord Singleford's Rasper. Purple cap. Black sleeves.
"We scratched our other one, and put all hopes on your word," saidthe Colonel. "Why, what is that? Silver Blaze favorite?"
"Five to four against Silver Blaze!" roared the ring. "Five to fouragainst Silver Blaze! Five to fifteen against Desborough! Five tofour on the field!"
"There are the numbers up," I cried. "They are all six there."
"All six there? Then my horse is running," cried the Colonel in greatagitation. "But I don't see him. My colors have not passed."
"Only five have passed. This must be he."
As I spoke a powerful bay horse swept out from the weightingenclosure and cantered past us, bearing on its back the well-knownblack and red of the Colonel.
"That's not my horse," cried the owner. "That beast has not a whitehair upon its body. What is this that you have done, Mr. Holmes?"
"Well, well, let us see how he gets on," said my friend,imperturbably. For a few minutes he gazed through my field-glass."Capital! An excellent start!" he cried suddenly. "There they are,coming round the curve!"
From our drag we had a superb view as they came up the straight. Thesix horses were so close together that a carpet could have coveredthem, but half way up the yellow of the Mapleton stable showed to thefront. Before they reached us, however, Desborough's bolt was shot,and the Colonel's horse, coming away with a rush, passed the post agood six lengths before its rival, the Duke of Balmoral's Iris makinga bad third.
"It's my race, anyhow," gasped the Colonel, passing his hand over hiseyes. "I confess that I can make neither head nor tail of it. Don'tyou think that you have kept up your mystery long enough, Mr.Holmes?"
"Certainly, Colonel, you shall know everything. Let us all go roundand have a look at the horse together. Here he is," he continued, aswe made our way into the weighing enclosure, where only owners andtheir friends find admittance. "You have only to wash his face andhis leg in spirits of wine, and you will find that he is the same oldSilver Blaze as ever."
"You take my breath away!"
"I found him in the hands of a faker, and took the liberty of runninghim just as he was sent over."
"My dear sir, you have done wonders. The horse looks very fit andwell. It never went better in its life. I owe you a thousandapologies for having doubted your ability. You have done me a greatservice by recovering my horse. You would do me a greater still ifyou could lay your hands on the murderer of John Straker."
"I have done so," said Holmes quietly.
The Colonel and I stared at him in amazement. "You have got him!Where is he, then?"
"He is here."
"Here! Where?"
"In my company at the present moment."
The Colonel flushed angrily. "I quite recognize that I am underobligations to you, Mr. Holmes," said he, "but I must regard what youhave just said as either a very bad joke or an insult."
Sherlock Holmes laughed. "I assure you that I have not associated youwith the crime, Colonel," said he. "The real murderer is standingimmediately behind you." He stepped past and laid his hand upon theglossy neck of the thoroughbred.
"The horse!" cried both the Colonel and myself.
"Yes, the horse. And it may lessen his guilt if I say that it wasdone in self-defence, and that John Straker was a man who wasentirely unworthy of your confidence. But there goes the bell, and asI stand to win a little on this next race, I shall defer a lengthyexplanation until a more fitting time."
We had the corner of a Pullman car to ourselves that evening as wewhirled back to London, and I fancy that the journey was a short oneto Colonel Ross as well as to myself, as we listened to ourcompanion's narrative of the events which had occurred at theDartmoor training-stables upon the Monday night, and the means bywhich he had unravelled them.
"I confess," said he, "that any theories which I had formed from thenewspaper reports were entirely erroneous. And yet there wereindications there, had they not been overlaid by other details whichconcealed their true import. I went to Devonshire with the convictionthat Fitzroy Simpson was the true culprit, although, of course, I sawthat the evidence against him was by no means complete. It was whileI was in the carriage, just as we reached the trainer's house, thatthe immense significance of the curried mutton occurred to me. Youmay remember that I was distrait, and remained sitting after you hadall alighted. I was marvelling in my own mind how I could possiblyhave overlooked so obvious a clue."
"I confess," said the Colonel, "that even now I cannot see how ithelps us."
"It was the first link in my chain of reasoning. Powdered opium is byno means tasteless. The flavor is not disagreeable, but it isperceptible. Were it mixed with any ordinary dish the eater wouldundoubtedly detect it, and would probably eat no more. A curry wasexactly the medium which would disguise this taste. By no possiblesupposition could this stranger, Fitzroy Simpson, have caused curryto be served in the trainer's family that night, and it is surely toomonstrous a coincidence to suppose that he happened to come alongwith powdered opium upon the very night when a dish happened to beserved which would disguise the flavor. That is unthinkable.Therefore Simpson becomes eliminated from the case, and our attentioncenters upon Straker and his wife, the only two people who could havechosen curried mutton for supper that night. The opium was addedafter the dish was set aside for the stable-boy, for the others hadthe same for supper with no ill effects. Which of them, then, hadaccess to that dish without the maid seeing them?
"Before deciding that question I had grasped the significance of thesilence of the dog, for one true inference invariably suggestsothers. The Simpson incident had shown me that a dog was kept in thestables, and yet, though some one had been in and had fetched out ahorse, he had not barked enough to arouse the two lads in the loft.Obviously the midnight visitor was some one whom the dog knew well.
"I was already convinced, or almost convinced, that John Straker wentdown to the stables in the dead of the night and took out SilverBlaze. For what purpose? For a dishonest one, obviously, or whyshould he drug his own stable-boy? And yet I was at a loss to knowwhy. There have been cases before now where trainers have made sureof great sums of money by laying against their own horses, throughagents, and then preventing them from winning by fraud. Sometimes itis a pulling jockey. Sometimes it is some surer and subtler means.What was it here? I hoped that the contents of his pockets might helpme to form a conclusion.
"And they did so. You cannot have forgotten the singular knife whichwas found in the dead man's hand, a knife which certainly no sane manwould choose for a weapon. It was, as Dr. Watson told us, a form ofknife which is used for the most delicate operations known insurgery. And it was to be used for a delicate operation that night.You must know, with your wide experience of turf matters, ColonelRoss, that it is possible to make a slight nick upon the tendons of ahorse's ham, and to do it subcutaneously, so as to leave absolutelyno trace. A horse so treated would develop a slight lameness, whichwould be put down to a strain in exercise or a touch of rheumatism,but never to foul play."
"Villain! Scoundrel!" cried the Colonel.
"We have here the explanation of why John Straker wished to take thehorse out on to the moor. So spirited a creature would have certainlyroused the soundest of sleepers when it felt the prick of the knife.It was absolutely necessary to do it in the open air."
"I have been blind!" cried the Colonel. "Of course that was why heneeded the candle, and struck the match."
"Undoubtedly. But in examining his belongings I was fortunate enoughto discover not only the method of the crime, but even its motives.As a man of the world, Colonel, you know that men do not carry otherpeople's bills about in their pockets. We have most of us quiteenough to do to settle our own. I at once concluded that Straker wasleading a double life, and keeping a second establishment. The natureof the bill showed that there was a lady in the case, and one who hadexpensive tastes. Liberal as you are with your servants, one canhardly expect that they can buy twenty-guinea walking dresses fortheir ladies. I questioned Mrs. Straker as to the dress without herknowing it, and having satisfied myself that it had never reachedher, I made a note of the milliner's address, and felt that bycalling there with Straker's photograph I could easily dispose of themythical Derbyshire.
"From that time on all was plain. Straker had led out the horse to ahollow where his light would be invisible. Simpson in his flight haddropped his cravat, and Straker had picked it up--with some idea,perhaps, that he might use it in securing the horse's leg. Once inthe hollow, he had got behind the horse and had struck a light; butthe creature frightened at the sudden glare, and with the strangeinstinct of animals feeling that some mischief was intended, hadlashed out, and the steel shoe had struck Straker full on theforehead. He had already, in spite of the rain, taken off hisovercoat in order to do his delicate task, and so, as he fell, hisknife gashed his thigh. Do I make it clear?"
"Wonderful!" cried the Colonel. "Wonderful! You might have beenthere!"
"My final shot was, I confess a very long one. It struck me that soastute a man as Straker would not undertake this delicatetendon-nicking without a little practice. What could he practice on?My eyes fell upon the sheep, and I asked a question which, rather tomy surprise, showed that my surmise was correct.
"When I returned to London I called upon the milliner, who hadrecognized Straker as an excellent customer of the name ofDerbyshire, who had a very dashing wife, with a strong partiality forexpensive dresses. I have no doubt that this woman had plunged himover head and ears in debt, and so led him into this miserable plot."
"You have explained all but one thing," cried the Colonel. "Where wasthe horse?"
"Ah, it bolted, and was cared for by one of your neighbors. We musthave an amnesty in that direction, I think. This is Clapham Junction,if I am not mistaken, and we shall be in Victoria in less than tenminutes. If you care to smoke a cigar in our rooms, Colonel, I shallbe happy to give you any other details which might interest you."





                            THE YELLOW FACE
[In publishing these short sketches based upon the numerous cases inwhich my companion's singular gifts have made us the listeners to,and eventually the actors in, some strange drama, it is only naturalthat I should dwell rather upon his successes than upon his failures.And this not so much for the sake of his reputations--for, indeed, itwas when he was at his wits' end that his energy and his versatilitywere most admirable--but because where he failed it happened toooften that no one else succeeded, and that the tale was left foreverwithout a conclusion. Now and again, however, it chanced that evenwhen he erred, the truth was still discovered. I have noted of somehalf-dozen cases of the kind of which "The Adventure of the MusgraveRitual" and that which I am about to recount are the two whichpresent the strongest features of interest.]
Sherlock Holmes was a man who seldom took exercise for exercise'ssake. Few men were capable of greater muscular effort, and he wasundoubtedly one of the finest boxers of his weight that I have everseen; but he looked upon aimless bodily exertion as a waste ofenergy, and he seldom bestirred himself save when there was someprofessional object to be served. Then he was absolutely untiring andindefatigable. That he should have kept himself in training undersuch circumstances is remarkable, but his diet was usually of thesparest, and his habits were simple to the verge of austerity. Savefor the occasional use of cocaine, he had no vices, and he onlyturned to the drug as a protest against the monotony of existencewhen cases were scanty and the papers uninteresting.
One day in early spring he had so far relaxed as to go for a walkwith me in the Park, where the first faint shoots of green werebreaking out upon the elms, and the sticky spear-heads of thechestnuts were just beginning to burst into their five-fold leaves.For two hours we rambled about together, in silence for the mostpart, as befits two men who know each other intimately. It was nearlyfive before we were back in Baker Street once more.
"Beg pardon, sir," said our page-boy, as he opened the door. "There'sbeen a gentleman here asking for you, sir."
Holmes glanced reproachfully at me. "So much for afternoon walks!"said he. "Has this gentleman gone, then?"
"Yes, sir."
"Didn't you ask him in?"
"Yes, sir; he came in."
"How long did he wait?"
"Half an hour, sir. He was a very restless gentleman, sir, a-walkin'and a-stampin' all the time he was here. I was waitin' outside thedoor, sir, and I could hear him. At last he outs into the passage,and he cries, 'Is that man never goin' to come?' Those were his verywords, sir. 'You'll only need to wait a little longer,' says I. 'ThenI'll wait in the open air, for I feel half choked,' says he. 'I'll beback before long.' And with that he ups and he outs, and all I couldsay wouldn't hold him back."
"Well, well, you did your best," said Holmes, as we walked into ourroom. "It's very annoying, though, Watson. I was badly in need of acase, and this looks, from the man's impatience, as if it were ofimportance. Hullo! That's not your pipe on the table. He must haveleft his behind him. A nice old brier with a good long stem of whatthe tobacconists call amber. I wonder how many real amber mouthpiecesthere are in London? Some people think that a fly in it is a sign.Well, he must have been disturbed in his mind to leave a pipe behindhim which he evidently values highly."
"How do you know that he values it highly?" I asked.
"Well, I should put the original cost of the pipe at seven andsixpence. Now it has, you see, been twice mended, once in the woodenstem and once in the amber. Each of these mends, done, as youobserve, with silver bands, must have cost more than the pipe didoriginally. The man must value the pipe highly when he prefers topatch it up rather than buy a new one with the same money."
"Anything else?" I asked, for Holmes was turning the pipe about inhis hand, and staring at it in his peculiar pensive way.
He held it up and tapped on it with his long, thin fore-finger, as aprofessor might who was lecturing on a bone.
"Pipes are occasionally of extraordinary interest," said he. "Nothinghas more individuality, save perhaps watches and bootlaces. Theindications here, however, are neither very marked nor veryimportant. The owner is obviously a muscular man, left-handed, withan excellent set of teeth, careless in his habits, and with no needto practise economy."
My friend threw out the information in a very offhand way, but I sawthat he cocked his eye at me to see if I had followed his reasoning.
"You think a man must be well-to-do if he smokes a seven-shillingpipe," said I.
"This is Grosvenor mixture at eightpence an ounce," Holmes answered,knocking a little out on his palm. "As he might get an excellentsmoke for half the price, he has no need to practise economy."
"And the other points?"
"He has been in the habit of lighting his pipe at lamps and gas-jets.You can see that it is quite charred all down one side. Of course amatch could not have done that. Why should a man hold a match to theside of his pipe? But you cannot light it at a lamp without gettingthe bowl charred. And it is all on the right side of the pipe. Fromthat I gather that he is a left-handed man. You hold your own pipe tothe lamp, and see how naturally you, being right-handed, hold theleft side to the flame. You might do it once the other way, but notas a constancy. This has always been held so. Then he has bittenthrough his amber. It takes a muscular, energetic fellow, and onewith a good set of teeth, to do that. But if I am not mistaken I hearhim upon the stair, so we shall have something more interesting thanhis pipe to study."
An instant later our door opened, and a tall young man entered theroom. He was well but quietly dressed in a dark-gray suit, andcarried a brown wide-awake in his hand. I should have put him atabout thirty, though he was really some years older.
"I beg your pardon," said he, with some embarrassment; "I suppose Ishould have knocked. Yes, of course I should have knocked. The factis that I am a little upset, and you must put it all down to that."He passed his hand over his forehead like a man who is half dazed,and then fell rather than sat down upon a chair.
"I can see that you have not slept for a night or two," said Holmes,in his easy, genial way. "That tries a man's nerves more than work,and more even than pleasure. May I ask how I can help you?"
"I wanted your advice, sir. I don't know what to do and my whole lifeseems to have gone to pieces."
"You wish to employ me as a consulting detective?"
"Not that only. I want your opinion as a judicious man--as a man ofthe world. I want to know what I ought to do next. I hope to Godyou'll be able to tell me."
He spoke in little, sharp, jerky outbursts, and it seemed to me thatto speak at all was very painful to him, and that his will allthrough was overriding his inclinations.
"It's a very delicate thing," said he. "One does not like to speak ofone's domestic affairs to strangers. It seems dreadful to discuss theconduct of one's wife with two men whom I have never seen before.It's horrible to have to do it. But I've got to the end of my tether,and I must have advice."
"My dear Mr. Grant Munro--" began Holmes.
Our visitor sprang from his chair. "What!" he cried, "you know myname?"
"If you wish to preserve your incognito," said Holmes, smiling, "Iwould suggest that you cease to write your name upon the lining ofyour hat, or else that you turn the crown towards the person whom youare addressing. I was about to say that my friend and I have listenedto a good many strange secrets in this room, and that we have had thegood fortune to bring peace to many troubled souls. I trust that wemay do as much for you. Might I beg you, as time may prove to be ofimportance, to furnish me with the facts of your case without furtherdelay?"
Our visitor again passed his hand over his forehead, as if he foundit bitterly hard. From every gesture and expression I could see thathe was a reserved, self-contained man, with a dash of pride in hisnature, more likely to hide his wounds than to expose them. Thensuddenly, with a fierce gesture of his closed hand, like one whothrows reserve to the winds, he began.
"The facts are these, Mr. Holmes," said he. "I am a married man, andhave been so for three years. During that time my wife and I haveloved each other as fondly and lived as happily as any two that everwere joined. We have not had a difference, not one, in thought orword or deed. And now, since last Monday, there has suddenly sprungup a barrier between us, and I find that there is something in herlife and in her thought of which I know as little as if she were thewoman who brushes by me in the street. We are estranged, and I wantto know why.
"Now there is one thing that I want to impress upon you before I goany further, Mr. Holmes. Effie loves me. Don't let there be anymistake about that. She loves me with her whole heart and soul, andnever more than now. I know it. I feel it. I don't want to argueabout that. A man can tell easily enough when a woman loves him. Butthere's this secret between us, and we can never be the same until itis cleared."
"Kindly let me have the facts, Mr. Munro," said Holmes, with someimpatience.
"I'll tell you what I know about Effie's history. She was a widowwhen I met her first, though quite young--only twenty-five. Her namethen was Mrs. Hebron. She went out to America when she was young, andlived in the town of Atlanta, where she married this Hebron, who wasa lawyer with a good practice. They had one child, but the yellowfever broke out badly in the place, and both husband and child diedof it. I have seen his death certificate. This sickened her ofAmerica, and she came back to live with a maiden aunt at Pinner, inMiddlesex. I may mention that her husband had left her comfortablyoff, and that she had a capital of about four thousand five hundredpounds, which had been so well invested by him that it returned anaverage of seven per cent. She had only been six months at Pinnerwhen I met her; we fell in love with each other, and we married a fewweeks afterwards.
"I am a hop merchant myself, and as I have an income of seven oreight hundred, we found ourselves comfortably off, and took a niceeighty-pound-a-year villa at Norbury. Our little place was verycountrified, considering that it is so close to town. We had an innand two houses a little above us, and a single cottage at the otherside of the field which faces us, and except those there were nohouses until you got half way to the station. My business took meinto town at certain seasons, but in summer I had less to do, andthen in our country home my wife and I were just as happy as could bewished. I tell you that there never was a shadow between us untilthis accursed affair began.
"There's one thing I ought to tell you before I go further. When wemarried, my wife made over all her property to me--rather against mywill, for I saw how awkward it would be if my business affairs wentwrong. However, she would have it so, and it was done. Well, aboutsix weeks ago she came to me.
"'Jack,' said she, 'when you took my money you said that if ever Iwanted any I was to ask you for it.'
"'Certainly,' said I. 'It's all your own.'
"'Well,' said she, 'I want a hundred pounds.'
"I was a bit staggered at this, for I had imagined it was simply anew dress or something of the kind that she was after.
"'What on earth for?' I asked.
"'Oh,' said she, in her playful way, 'you said that you were only mybanker, and bankers never ask questions, you know.'
"'If you really mean it, of course you shall have the money,' said I.
"'Oh, yes, I really mean it.'
"'And you won't tell me what you want it for?'
"'Some day, perhaps, but not just at present, Jack.'
"So I had to be content with that, though it was the first time thatthere had ever been any secret between us. I gave her a check, and Inever thought any more of the matter. It may have nothing to do withwhat came afterwards, but I thought it only right to mention it.
"Well, I told you just now that there is a cottage not far from ourhouse. There is just a field between us, but to reach it you have togo along the road and then turn down a lane. Just beyond it is a nicelittle grove of Scotch firs, and I used to be very fond of strollingdown there, for trees are always a neighborly kind of things. Thecottage had been standing empty this eight months, and it was a pity,for it was a pretty two storied place, with an old-fashioned porchand honeysuckle about it. I have stood many a time and thought what aneat little homestead it would make.
"Well, last Monday evening I was taking a stroll down that way, whenI met an empty van coming up the lane, and saw a pile of carpets andthings lying about on the grass-plot beside the porch. It was clearthat the cottage had at last been let. I walked past it, and wonderedwhat sort of folk they were who had come to live so near us. And as Ilooked I suddenly became aware that a face was watching me out of oneof the upper windows.
"I don't know what there was about that face, Mr. Holmes, but itseemed to send a chill right down my back. I was some little way off,so that I could not make out the features, but there was somethingunnatural and inhuman about the face. That was the impression that Ihad, and I moved quickly forwards to get a nearer view of the personwho was watching me. But as I did so the face suddenly disappeared,so suddenly that it seemed to have been plucked away into thedarkness of the room. I stood for five minutes thinking the businessover, and trying to analyze my impressions. I could not tell if theface were that of a man or a woman. It had been too far from me forthat. But its color was what had impressed me most. It was of a lividchalky white, and with something set and rigid about it which wasshockingly unnatural. So disturbed was I that I determined to see alittle more of the new inmates of the cottage. I approached andknocked at the door, which was instantly opened by a tall, gauntwoman with a harsh, forbidding face.
"'What may you be wantin'?' she asked, in a Northern accent.
"'I am your neighbor over yonder,' said I, nodding towards my house.'I see that you have only just moved in, so I thought that if I couldbe of any help to you in any--'
"'Ay, we'll just ask ye when we want ye,' said she, and shut the doorin my face. Annoyed at the churlish rebuff, I turned my back andwalked home. All evening, though I tried to think of other things, mymind would still turn to the apparition at the window and therudeness of the woman. I determined to say nothing about the formerto my wife, for she is a nervous, highly strung woman, and I had nowish that she would share the unpleasant impression which had beenproduced upon myself. I remarked to her, however, before I fellasleep, that the cottage was now occupied, to which she returned noreply.
"I am usually an extremely sound sleeper. It has been a standing jestin the family that nothing could ever wake me during the night. Andyet somehow on that particular night, whether it may have been theslight excitement produced by my little adventure or not I know not,but I slept much more lightly than usual. Half in my dreams I wasdimly conscious that something was going on in the room, andgradually became aware that my wife had dressed herself and wasslipping on her mantle and her bonnet. My lips were parted to murmurout some sleepy words of surprise or remonstrance at this untimelypreparation, when suddenly my half-opened eyes fell upon her face,illuminated by the candle-light, and astonishment held me dumb. Shewore an expression such as I had never seen before--such as I shouldhave thought her incapable of assuming. She was deadly pale andbreathing fast, glancing furtively towards the bed as she fastenedher mantle, to see if she had disturbed me. Then, thinking that I wasstill asleep, she slipped noiselessly from the room, and an instantlater I heard a sharp creaking which could only come from the hingesof the front door. I sat up in bed and rapped my knuckles against therail to make certain that I was truly awake. Then I took my watchfrom under the pillow. It was three in the morning. What on thisearth could my wife be doing out on the country road at three in themorning?
"I had sat for about twenty minutes turning the thing over in my mindand trying to find some possible explanation. The more I thought, themore extraordinary and inexplicable did it appear. I was stillpuzzling over it when I heard the door gently close again, and herfootsteps coming up the stairs.
"'Where in the world have you been, Effie?' I asked as she entered.
"She gave a violent start and a kind of gasping cry when I spoke, andthat cry and start troubled me more than all the rest, for there wassomething indescribably guilty about them. My wife had always been awoman of a frank, open nature, and it gave me a chill to see herslinking into her own room, and crying out and wincing when her ownhusband spoke to her.
"'You awake, Jack!' she cried, with a nervous laugh. 'Why, I thoughtthat nothing could awake you.'
"'Where have you been?' I asked, more sternly.
"'I don't wonder that you are surprised,' said she, and I could seethat her fingers were trembling as she undid the fastenings of hermantle. 'Why, I never remember having done such a thing in my lifebefore. The fact is that I felt as though I were choking, and had aperfect longing for a breath of fresh air. I really think that Ishould have fainted if I had not gone out. I stood at the door for afew minutes, and now I am quite myself again.'
"All the time that she was telling me this story she never oncelooked in my direction, and her voice was quite unlike her usualtones. It was evident to me that she was saying what was false. Isaid nothing in reply, but turned my face to the wall, sick at heart,with my mind filled with a thousand venomous doubts and suspicions.What was it that my wife was concealing from me? Where had she beenduring that strange expedition? I felt that I should have no peaceuntil I knew, and yet I shrank from asking her again after once shehad told me what was false. All the rest of the night I tossed andtumbled, framing theory after theory, each more unlikely than thelast.
"I should have gone to the City that day, but I was too disturbed inmy mind to be able to pay attention to business matters. My wifeseemed to be as upset as myself, and I could see from the littlequestioning glances which she kept shooting at me that she understoodthat I disbelieved her statement, and that she was at her wits' endwhat to do. We hardly exchanged a word during breakfast, andimmediately afterwards I went out for a walk, that I might think thematter out in the fresh morning air.
"I went as far as the Crystal Palace, spent an hour in the grounds,and was back in Norbury by one o'clock. It happened that my way tookme past the cottage, and I stopped for an instant to look at thewindows, and to see if I could catch a glimpse of the strange facewhich had looked out at me on the day before. As I stood there,imagine my surprise, Mr. Holmes, when the door suddenly opened and mywife walked out.
"I was struck dumb with astonishment at the sight of her; but myemotions were nothing to those which showed themselves upon her facewhen our eyes met. She seemed for an instant to wish to shrink backinside the house again; and then, seeing how useless all concealmentmust be, she came forward, with a very white face and frightened eyeswhich belied the smile upon her lips.
"'Ah, Jack,' she said, 'I have just been in to see if I can be of anyassistance to our new neighbors. Why do you look at me like that,Jack? You are not angry with me?'
"'So,' said I, 'this is where you went during the night.'
"'What do you mean?' she cried.
"'You came here. I am sure of it. Who are these people, that youshould visit them at such an hour?'
"'I have not been here before.'
"'How can you tell me what you know is false?' I cried. 'Your veryvoice changes as you speak. When have I ever had a secret from you? Ishall enter that cottage, and I shall probe the matter to thebottom.'
"'No, no, Jack, for God's sake!' she gasped, in uncontrollableemotion. Then, as I approached the door, she seized my sleeve andpulled me back with convulsive strength.
"'I implore you not to do this, Jack,' she cried. 'I swear that Iwill tell you everything some day, but nothing but misery can come ofit if you enter that cottage.' Then, as I tried to shake her off, sheclung to me in a frenzy of entreaty.
"'Trust me, Jack!' she cried. 'Trust me only this once. You willnever have cause to regret it. You know that I would not have asecret from you if it were not for your own sake. Our whole lives areat stake in this. If you come home with me, all will be well. If youforce your way into that cottage, all is over between us.'
"There was such earnestness, such despair, in her manner that herwords arrested me, and I stood irresolute before the door.
"'I will trust you on one condition, and on one condition only,' saidI at last. 'It is that this mystery comes to an end from now. You areat liberty to preserve your secret, but you must promise me thatthere shall be no more nightly visits, no more doings which are keptfrom my knowledge. I am willing to forget those which are passed ifyou will promise that there shall be no more in the future.'
"'I was sure that you would trust me,' she cried, with a great sighof relief. 'It shall be just as you wish. Come away--oh, come away upto the house.'
"Still pulling at my sleeve, she led me away from the cottage. As wewent I glanced back, and there was that yellow livid face watching usout of the upper window. What link could there be between thatcreature and my wife? Or how could the coarse, rough woman whom I hadseen the day before be connected with her? It was a strange puzzle,and yet I knew that my mind could never know ease again until I hadsolved it.
"For two days after this I stayed at home, and my wife appeared toabide loyally by our engagement, for, as far as I know, she neverstirred out of the house. On the third day, however, I had ampleevidence that her solemn promise was not enough to hold her back fromthis secret influence which drew her away from her husband and herduty.
"I had gone into town on that day, but I returned by the 2.40 insteadof the 3.36, which is my usual train. As I entered the house the maidran into the hall with a startled face.
"'Where is your mistress?' I asked.
"'I think that she has gone out for a walk,' she answered.
"My mind was instantly filled with suspicion. I rushed upstairs tomake sure that she was not in the house. As I did so I happened toglance out of one of the upper windows, and saw the maid with whom Ihad just been speaking running across the field in the direction ofthe cottage. Then of course I saw exactly what it all meant. My wifehad gone over there, and had asked the servant to call her if Ishould return. Tingling with anger, I rushed down and hurried across,determined to end the matter once and forever. I saw my wife and themaid hurrying back along the lane, but I did not stop to speak withthem. In the cottage lay the secret which was casting a shadow overmy life. I vowed that, come what might, it should be a secret nolonger. I did not even knock when I reached it, but turned the handleand rushed into the passage.
"It was all still and quiet upon the ground floor. In the kitchen akettle was singing on the fire, and a large black cat lay coiled upin the basket; but there was no sign of the woman whom I had seenbefore. I ran into the other room, but it was equally deserted. ThenI rushed up the stairs, only to find two other rooms empty anddeserted at the top. There was no one at all in the whole house. Thefurniture and pictures were of the most common and vulgardescription, save in the one chamber at the window of which I hadseen the strange face. That was comfortable and elegant, and all mysuspicions rose into a fierce bitter flame when I saw that on themantelpiece stood a copy of a full-length photograph of my wife,which had been taken at my request only three months ago.
"I stayed long enough to make certain that the house was absolutelyempty. Then I left it, feeling a weight at my heart such as I hadnever had before. My wife came out into the hall as I entered myhouse; but I was too hurt and angry to speak with her, and pushingpast her, I made my way into my study. She followed me, however,before I could close the door.
"'I am sorry that I broke my promise, Jack,' said she; 'but if youknew all the circumstances I am sure that you would forgive me.'
"'Tell me everything, then,' said I.
"'I cannot, Jack, I cannot,' she cried.
"'Until you tell me who it is that has been living in that cottage,and who it is to whom you have given that photograph, there can neverbe any confidence between us,' said I, and breaking away from her, Ileft the house. That was yesterday, Mr. Holmes, and I have not seenher since, nor do I know anything more about this strange business.It is the first shadow that has come between us, and it has so shakenme that I do not know what I should do for the best. Suddenly thismorning it occurred to me that you were the man to advise me, so Ihave hurried to you now, and I place myself unreservedly in yourhands. If there is any point which I have not made clear, prayquestion me about it. But, above all, tell me quickly what I am todo, for this misery is more than I can bear."
Holmes and I had listened with the utmost interest to thisextraordinary statement, which had been delivered in the jerky,broken fashion of a man who is under the influence of extremeemotions. My companion sat silent for some time, with his chin uponhis hand, lost in thought.
"Tell me," said he at last, "could you swear that this was a man'sface which you saw at the window?"
"Each time that I saw it I was some distance away from it, so that itis impossible for me to say."
"You appear, however, to have been disagreeably impressed by it."
"It seemed to be of an unnatural color, and to have a strangerigidity about the features. When I approached, it vanished with ajerk."
"How long is it since your wife asked you for a hundred pounds?"
"Nearly two months."
"Have you ever seen a photograph of her first husband?"
"No; there was a great fire at Atlanta very shortly after his death,and all her papers were destroyed."
"And yet she had a certificate of death. You say that you saw it."
"Yes; she got a duplicate after the fire."
"Did you ever meet any one who knew her in America?"
"No."
"Did she ever talk of revisiting the place?"
"No."
"Or get letters from it?"
"No."
"Thank you. I should like to think over the matter a little now. Ifthe cottage is now permanently deserted we may have some difficulty.If, on the other hand, as I fancy is more likely, the inmates werewarned of your coming, and left before you entered yesterday, thenthey may be back now, and we should clear it all up easily. Let meadvise you, then, to return to Norbury, and to examine the windows ofthe cottage again. If you have reason to believe that is inhabited,do not force your way in, but send a wire to my friend and me. Weshall be with you within an hour of receiving it, and we shall thenvery soon get to the bottom of the business."
"And if it is still empty?"
"In that case I shall come out to-morrow and talk it over with you.Good-bye, and, above all, do not fret until you know that you reallyhave a cause for it."
"I am afraid that this is a bad business, Watson," said my companion,as he returned after accompanying Mr. Grant Munro to the door. "Whatdo you make of it?"
"It had an ugly sound," I answered.
"Yes. There's blackmail in it, or I am much mistaken."
"And who is the blackmailer?"
"Well, it must be the creature who lives in the only comfortable roomin the place, and has her photograph above his fireplace. Upon myword, Watson, there is something very attractive about that lividface at the window, and I would not have missed the case for worlds."
"You have a theory?"
"Yes, a provisional one. But I shall be surprised if it does not turnout to be correct. This woman's first husband is in that cottage."
"Why do you think so?"
"How else can we explain her frenzied anxiety that her second oneshould not enter it? The facts, as I read them, are something likethis: This woman was married in America. Her husband developed somehateful qualities; or shall we say that he contracted some loathsomedisease, and became a leper or an imbecile? She flies from him atlast, returns to England, changes her name, and starts her life, asshe thinks, afresh. She has been married three years, and believesthat her position is quite secure, having shown her husband the deathcertificate of some man whose name she has assumed, when suddenly herwhereabouts is discovered by her first husband; or, we may suppose,by some unscrupulous woman who has attached herself to the invalid.They write to the wife, and threaten to come and expose her. She asksfor a hundred pounds, and endeavors to buy them off. They come inspite of it, and when the husband mentions casually to the wife thatthere are new-comers in the cottage, she knows in some way that theyare her pursuers. She waits until her husband is asleep, and then sherushes down to endeavor to persuade them to leave her in peace.Having no success, she goes again next morning, and her husband meetsher, as he has told us, as she comes out. She promises him then notto go there again, but two days afterwards the hope of getting rid ofthose dreadful neighbors was too strong for her, and she made anotherattempt, taking down with her the photograph which had probably beendemanded from her. In the midst of this interview the maid rushed into say that the master had come home, on which the wife, knowing thathe would come straight down to the cottage, hurried the inmates outat the back door, into the grove of fir-trees, probably, which wasmentioned as standing near. In this way he found the place deserted.I shall be very much surprised, however, if it still so when hereconnoitres it this evening. What do you think of my theory?"
"It is all surmise."
"But at least it covers all the facts. When new facts come to ourknowledge which cannot be covered by it, it will be time enough toreconsider it. We can do nothing more until we have a message fromour friend at Norbury."
But we had not a very long time to wait for that. It came just as wehad finished our tea.
"The cottage is still tenanted," it said. "Have seen the face againat the window. Will meet the seven o'clock train, and will take nosteps until you arrive."
He was waiting on the platform when we stepped out, and we could seein the light of the station lamps that he was very pale, andquivering with agitation.
"They are still there, Mr. Holmes," said he, laying his hand hardupon my friend's sleeve. "I saw lights in the cottage as I came down.We shall settle it now once and for all."
"What is your plan, then?" asked Holmes, as he walked down the darktree-lined road.
"I am going to force my way in and see for myself who is in thehouse. I wish you both to be there as witnesses."
"You are quite determined to do this, in spite of your wife's warningthat it is better that you should not solve the mystery?"
"Yes, I am determined."
"Well, I think that you are in the right. Any truth is better thanindefinite doubt. We had better go up at once. Of course, legally, weare putting ourselves hopelessly in the wrong; but I think that it isworth it."
It was a very dark night, and a thin rain began to fall as we turnedfrom the high road into a narrow lane, deeply rutted, with hedges oneither side. Mr. Grant Munro pushed impatiently forward, however, andwe stumbled after him as best we could.
"There are the lights of my house," he murmured, pointing to aglimmer among the trees. "And here is the cottage which I am going toenter."
We turned a corner in the lane as he spoke, and there was thebuilding close beside us. A yellow bar falling across the blackforeground showed that the door was not quite closed, and one windowin the upper story was brightly illuminated. As we looked, we saw adark blur moving across the blind.
"There is that creature!" cried Grant Munro. "You can see foryourselves that some one is there. Now follow me, and we shall soonknow all."
We approached the door; but suddenly a woman appeared out of theshadow and stood in the golden track of the lamp-light. I could notsee her face in the darkness, but her arms were thrown out in anattitude of entreaty.
"For God's sake, don't Jack!" she cried. "I had a presentiment thatyou would come this evening. Think better of it, dear! Trust meagain, and you will never have cause to regret it."
"I have trusted you too long, Effie," he cried, sternly. "Leave go ofme! I must pass you. My friends and I are going to settle this matteronce and forever!" He pushed her to one side, and we followed closelyafter him. As he threw the door open an old woman ran out in front ofhim and tried to bar his passage, but he thrust her back, and aninstant afterwards we were all upon the stairs. Grant Munro rushedinto the lighted room at the top, and we entered at his heels.
It was a cosy, well-furnished apartment, with two candles burningupon the table and two upon the mantelpiece. In the corner, stoopingover a desk, there sat what appeared to be a little girl. Her facewas turned away as we entered, but we could see that she was dressedin a red frock, and that she had long white gloves on. As she whiskedround to us, I gave a cry of surprise and horror. The face which sheturned towards us was of the strangest livid tint, and the featureswere absolutely devoid of any expression. An instant later themystery was explained. Holmes, with a laugh, passed his hand behindthe child's ear, a mask peeled off from her countenance, an there wasa little coal black negress, with all her white teeth flashing inamusement at our amazed faces. I burst out laughing, out of sympathywith her merriment; but Grant Munro stood staring, with his handclutching his throat.
"My God!" he cried. "What can be the meaning of this?"
"I will tell you the meaning of it," cried the lady, sweeping intothe room with a proud, set face. "You have forced me, against my ownjudgment, to tell you, and now we must both make the best of it. Myhusband died at Atlanta. My child survived."
"Your child?"
She drew a large silver locket from her bosom. "You have never seenthis open."
"I understood that it did not open."
She touched a spring, and the front hinged back. There was a portraitwithin of a man strikingly handsome and intelligent-looking, butbearing unmistakable signs upon his features of his African descent.
"That is John Hebron, of Atlanta," said the lady, "and a nobler mannever walked the earth. I cut myself off from my race in order to wedhim, but never once while he lived did I for an instant regret it. Itwas our misfortune that our only child took after his people ratherthan mine. It is often so in such matches, and little Lucy is darkerfar than ever her father was. But dark or fair, she is my own dearlittle girlie, and her mother's pet." The little creature ran acrossat the words and nestled up against the lady's dress. "When I lefther in America," she continued, "it was only because her health wasweak, and the change might have done her harm. She was given to thecare of a faithful Scotch woman who had once been our servant. Neverfor an instant did I dream of disowning her as my child. But whenchance threw you in my way, Jack, and I learned to love you, I fearedto tell you about my child. God forgive me, I feared that I shouldlose you, and I had not the courage to tell you. I had to choosebetween you, and in my weakness I turned away from my own littlegirl. For three years I have kept her existence a secret from you,but I heard from the nurse, and I knew that all was well with her. Atlast, however, there came an overwhelming desire to see the childonce more. I struggled against it, but in vain. Though I knew thedanger, I determined to have the child over, if it were but for a fewweeks. I sent a hundred pounds to the nurse, and I gave herinstructions about this cottage, so that she might come as aneighbor, without my appearing to be in any way connected with her. Ipushed my precautions so far as to order her to keep the child in thehouse during the daytime, and to cover up her little face and handsso that even those who might see her at the window should not gossipabout there being a black child in the neighborhood. If I had beenless cautious I might have been more wise, but I was half crazy withfear that you should learn the truth.
"It was you who told me first that the cottage was occupied. I shouldhave waited for the morning, but I could not sleep for excitement,and so at last I slipped out, knowing how difficult it is to awakeyou. But you saw me go, and that was the beginning of my troubles.Next day you had my secret at your mercy, but you nobly refrainedfrom pursuing your advantage. Three days later, however, the nurseand child only just escaped from the back door as you rushed in atthe front one. And now to-night you at last know all, and I ask youwhat is to become of us, my child and me?" She clasped her hands andwaited for an answer.
It was a long ten minutes before Grant Munro broke the silence, andwhen his answer came it was one of which I love to think. He liftedthe little child, kissed her, and then, still carrying her, he heldhis other hand out to his wife and turned towards the door.
"We can talk it over more comfortably at home," said he. "I am not avery good man, Effie, but I think that I am a better one than youhave given me credit for being."
Holmes and I followed them down the lane, and my friend plucked at mysleeve as we came out.
"I think," said he, "that we shall be of more use in London than inNorbury."
Not another word did he say of the case until late that night, whenhe was turning away, with his lighted candle, for his bedroom.
"Watson," said he, "if it should ever strike you that I am getting alittle over-confident in my powers, or giving less pains to a casethan it deserves, kindly whisper 'Norbury' in my ear, and I shall beinfinitely obliged to you." 





                       THE STOCK-BROKER'S CLERK
Shortly after my marriage I had bought a connection in the Paddingtondistrict. Old Mr. Farquhar, from whom I purchased it, had at one timean excellent general practice; but his age, and an affliction of thenature of St. Vitus's dance from which he suffered, had very muchthinned it. The public not unnaturally goes on the principle that hewho would heal others must himself be whole, and looks askance at thecurative powers of the man whose own case is beyond the reach of hisdrugs. Thus as my predecessor weakened his practice declined, untilwhen I purchased it from him it had sunk from twelve hundred tolittle more than three hundred a year. I had confidence, however, inmy own youth and energy, and was convinced that in a very few yearsthe concern would be as flourishing as ever.
For three months after taking over the practice I was kept veryclosely at work, and saw little of my friend Sherlock Holmes, for Iwas too busy to visit Baker Street, and he seldom went anywherehimself save upon professional business. I was surprised, therefore,when, one morning in June, as I sat reading the British MedicalJournal after breakfast, I heard a ring at the bell, followed by thehigh, somewhat strident tones of my old companion's voice.
"Ah, my dear Watson," said he, striding into the room, "I am verydelighted to see you! I trust that Mrs. Watson has entirely recoveredfrom all the little excitements connected with our adventure of theSign of Four."
"Thank you, we are both very well," said I, shaking him warmly by thehand.
"And I hope, also," he continued, sitting down in the rocking-chair,"that the cares of medical practice have not entirely obliterated theinterest which you used to take in our little deductive problems."
"On the contrary," I answered, "it was only last night that I waslooking over my old notes, and classifying some of our past results."
"I trust that you don't consider your collection closed."
"Not at all. I should wish nothing better than to have some more ofsuch experiences."
"To-day, for example?"
"Yes, to-day, if you like."
"And as far off as Birmingham?"
"Certainly, if you wish it."
"And the practice?"
"I do my neighbor's when he goes. He is always ready to work off thedebt."
"Ha! Nothing could be better," said Holmes, leaning back in his chairand looking keenly at me from under his half closed lids. "I perceivethat you have been unwell lately. Summer colds are always a littletrying."
"I was confined to the house by a severe chill for three days lastweek. I thought, however, that I had cast off every trace of it."
"So you have. You look remarkably robust."
"How, then, did you know of it?"
"My dear fellow, you know my methods."
"You deduced it, then?"
"Certainly."
"And from what?"
"From your slippers."
I glanced down at the new patent leathers which I was wearing. "Howon earth--" I began, but Holmes answered my question before it wasasked.
"Your slippers are new," he said. "You could not have had them morethan a few weeks. The soles which you are at this moment presentingto me are slightly scorched. For a moment I thought they might havegot wet and been burned in the drying. But near the instep there is asmall circular wafer of paper with the shopman's hieroglyphics uponit. Damp would of course have removed this. You had, then, beensitting with our feet outstretched to the fire, which a man wouldhardly do even in so wet a June as this if he were in his fullhealth."
Like all Holmes's reasoning the thing seemed simplicity itself whenit was once explained. He read the thought upon my features, and hissmile had a tinge of bitterness.
"I am afraid that I rather give myself away when I explain," said he."Results without causes are much more impressive. You are ready tocome to Birmingham, then?"
"Certainly. What is the case?"
"You shall hear it all in the train. My client is outside in afour-wheeler. Can you come at once?"
"In an instant." I scribbled a note to my neighbor, rushed upstairsto explain the matter to my wife, and joined Holmes upon thedoor-step.
"Your neighbor is a doctor," said he, nodding at the brass plate.
"Yes; he bought a practice as I did."
"An old-established one?"
"Just the same as mine. Both have been ever since the houses werebuilt."
"Ah! Then you got hold of the best of the two."
"I think I did. But how do you know?"
"By the steps, my boy. Yours are worn three inches deeper than his.But this gentleman in the cab is my client, Mr. Hall Pycroft. Allowme to introduce you to him. Whip your horse up, cabby, for we haveonly just time to catch our train."
The man whom I found myself facing was a well built,fresh-complexioned young fellow, with a frank, honest face and aslight, crisp, yellow mustache. He wore a very shiny top hat and aneat suit of sober black, which made him look what he was--a smartyoung City man, of the class who have been labeled cockneys, but whogive us our crack volunteer regiments, and who turn out more fineathletes and sportsmen than any body of men in these islands. Hisround, ruddy face was naturally full of cheeriness, but the cornersof his mouth seemed to me to be pulled down in a half-comicaldistress. It was not, however, until we were all in a first-classcarriage and well started upon our journey to Birmingham that I wasable to learn what the trouble was which had driven him to SherlockHolmes.
"We have a clear run here of seventy minutes," Holmes remarked. "Iwant you, Mr. Hall Pycroft, to tell my friend your very interestingexperience exactly as you have told it to me, or with more detail ifpossible. It will be of use to me to hear the succession of eventsagain. It is a case, Watson, which may prove to have something in it,or may prove to have nothing, but which, at least, presents thoseunusual and outr features which are as dear to you as they are tome. Now, Mr. Pycroft, I shall not interrupt you again."
Our young companion looked at me with a twinkle in his eye.
"The worst of the story is," said he, "that I show myself up as sucha confounded fool. Of course it may work out all right, and I don'tsee that I could have done otherwise; but if I have lost my crib andget nothing in exchange I shall feel what a soft Johnnie I have been.I'm not very good at telling a story, Dr. Watson, but it is like thiswith me:
"I used to have a billet at Coxon & Woodhouse's, of Draper's Gardens,but they were let in early in the spring through the Venezuelan loan,as no doubt you remember, and came a nasty cropper. I had been withthem five years, and old Coxon gave me a ripping good testimonialwhen the smash came, but of course we clerks were all turned adrift,the twenty-seven of us. I tried here and tried there, but there werelots of other chaps on the same lay as myself, and it was a perfectfrost for a long time. I had been taking three pounds a week atCoxon's, and I had saved about seventy of them, but I soon worked myway through that and out at the other end. I was fairly at the end ofmy tether at last, and could hardly find the stamps to answer theadvertisements or the envelopes to stick them to. I had worn out myboots paddling up office stairs, and I seemed just as far fromgetting a billet as ever.
"At last I saw a vacancy at Mawson & Williams's, the greatstock-broking firm in Lombard Street. I dare say E. C. is not much inyour line, but I can tell you that this is about the richest house inLondon. The advertisement was to be answered by letter only. I sentin my testimonial and application, but without the least hope ofgetting it. Back came an answer by return, saying that if I wouldappear next Monday I might take over my new duties at once, providedthat my appearance was satisfactory. No one knows how these thingsare worked. Some people say that the manager just plunges his handinto the heap and takes the first that comes. Anyhow it was myinnings that time, and I don't ever wish to feel better pleased. Thescrew was a pound a week rise, and the duties just about the same asat Coxon's.
"And now I come to the queer part of the business. I was in diggingsout Hampstead way, 17 Potter's Terrace. Well, I was sitting doing asmoke that very evening after I had been promised the appointment,when up came my landlady with a card which had "Arthur Pinner,Financial Agent," printed upon it. I had never heard the name beforeand could not imagine what he wanted with me; but, of course, I askedher to show him up. In he walked, a middle-sized, dark-haired,dark-eyed, black-bearded man, with a touch of the sheeny about hisnose. He had a brisk kind of way with him and spoke sharply, like aman who knew the value of time.
"'Mr. Hall Pycroft, I believe?' said he.
"'Yes, sir,' I answered, pushing a chair towards him.
"'Lately engaged at Coxon & Woodhouse's?'
"'Yes, sir.'
"'And now on the staff of Mawson's.'
"'Quite so.'
"'Well,' said he, 'the fact is that I have heard some reallyextraordinary stories about your financial ability. You rememberParker, who used to be Coxon's manager? He can never say enough aboutit.'
"Of course I was pleased to hear this. I had always been pretty sharpin the office, but I had never dreamed that I was talked about in theCity in this fashion.
"'You have a good memory?' said he.
"'Pretty fair,' I answered, modestly.
"'Have you kept in touch with the market while you have been out ofwork?' he asked.
"'Yes. I read the stock exchange list every morning.'
"'Now that shows real application!' he cried. 'That is the way toprosper! You won't mind my testing you, will you? Let me see. How areAyrshires?'
"'A hundred and six and a quarter to a hundred and five andseven-eighths.'
"'And New Zealand consolidated?'
"'A hundred and four.'
"'And British Broken Hills?'
"'Seven to seven-and-six.'
"'Wonderful!' he cried, with his hands up. 'This quite fits in withall that I had heard. My boy, my boy, you are very much too good tobe a clerk at Mawson's!'
"This outburst rather astonished me, as you can think. 'Well,' saidI, 'other people don't think quite so much of me as you seem to do,Mr. Pinner. I had a hard enough fight to get this berth, and I amvery glad to have it.'
"'Pooh, man; you should soar above it. You are not in your truesphere. Now, I'll tell you how it stands with me. What I have tooffer is little enough when measured by your ability, but whencompared with Mawson's, it's light to dark. Let me see. When do yougo to Mawson's?'
"'On Monday.'
"'Ha, ha! I think I would risk a little sporting flutter that youdon't go there at all.'
"'Not go to Mawson's?'
"'No, sir. By that day you will be the business manager of theFranco-Midland Hardware Company, Limited, with a hundred andthirty-four branches in the towns and villages of France, notcounting one in Brussels and one in San Remo.'
"This took my breath away. 'I never heard of it,' said I.
"'Very likely not. It has been kept very quiet, for the capital wasall privately subscribed, and it's too good a thing to let the publicinto. My brother, Harry Pinner, is promoter, and joins the boardafter allotment as managing director. He knew I was in the swim downhere, and asked me to pick up a good man cheap. A young, pushing manwith plenty of snap about him. Parker spoke of you, and that broughtme here tonight. We can only offer you a beggarly five hundred tostart with.'
"'Five hundred a year!' I shouted.
"'Only that at the beginning; but you are to have an overridingcommission of one per cent on all business done by your agents, andyou may take my word for it that this will come to more than yoursalary.'
"'But I know nothing about hardware.'
"'Tut, my boy; you know about figures.'
"My head buzzed, and I could hardly sit still in my chair. Butsuddenly a little chill of doubt came upon me.
"'I must be frank with you,' said I. 'Mawson only gives me twohundred, but Mawson is safe. Now, really, I know so little about yourcompany that--'
"'Ah, smart, smart!' he cried, in a kind of ecstasy of delight. 'Youare the very man for us. You are not to be talked over, and quiteright, too. Now, here's a note for a hundred pounds, and if you thinkthat we can do business you may just slip it into your pocket as anadvance upon your salary.'
"'That is very handsome,' said I. 'When should I take over my newduties?'
"'Be in Birmingham to-morrow at one,' said he. 'I have a note in mypocket here which you will take to my brother. You will find him at126b Corporation Street, where the temporary offices of the companyare situated. Of course he must confirm your engagement, but betweenourselves it will be all right.'
"'Really, I hardly know how to express my gratitude, Mr. Pinner,'said I.
"'Not at all, my boy. You have only got your desserts. There are oneor two small things--mere formalities--which I must arrange with you.You have a bit of paper beside you there. Kindly write upon it "I amperfectly willing to act as business manager to the Franco-MidlandHardware Company, Limited, at a minimum salary of 500."'
"I did as he asked, and he put the paper in his pocket.
"'There is one other detail,' said he. 'What do you intend to doabout Mawson's?'
"I had forgotten all about Mawson's in my joy. 'I'll write andresign,' said I.
"'Precisely what I don't want you to do. I had a row over you withMawson's manager. I had gone up to ask him about you, and he was veryoffensive; accused me of coaxing you away from the service of thefirm, and that sort of thing. At last I fairly lost my temper. "Ifyou want good men you should pay them a good price," said I.
"'"He would rather have our small price than your big one," said he.
"'"I'll lay you a fiver," said I, "that when he has my offer you'llnever so much as hear from him again."
"'"Done!" said he. "We picked him out of the gutter, and he won'tleave us so easily." Those were his very words.'
"'The impudent scoundrel!' I cried. 'I've never so much as seen himin my life. Why should I consider him in any way? I shall certainlynot write if you would rather I didn't.'
"'Good! That's a promise,' said he, rising from his chair. 'Well, I'mdelighted to have got so good a man for my brother. Here's youradvance of a hundred pounds, and here is the letter. Make a note ofthe address, 126b Corporation Street, and remember that one o'clockto-morrow is your appointment. Good-night; and may you have all thefortune that you deserve!'
"That's just about all that passed between us, as near as I canremember. You can imagine, Dr. Watson, how pleased I was at such anextraordinary bit of good fortune. I sat up half the night huggingmyself over it, and next day I was off to Birmingham in a train thatwould take me in plenty time for my appointment. I took my things toa hotel in New Street, and then I made my way to the address whichhad been given me.
"It was a quarter of an hour before my time, but I thought that wouldmake no difference. 126b was a passage between two large shops, whichled to a winding stone stair, from which there were many flats, letas offices to companies or professional men. The names of theoccupants were painted at the bottom on the wall, but there was nosuch name as the Franco-Midland Hardware Company, Limited. I stoodfor a few minutes with my heart in my boots, wondering whether thewhole thing was an elaborate hoax or not, when up came a man andaddressed me. He was very like the chap I had seen the night before,the same figure and voice, but he was clean shaven and his hair waslighter.
"'Are you Mr. Hall Pycroft?' he asked.
"'Yes,' said I.
"'Oh! I was expecting you, but you are a trifle before your time. Ihad a note from my brother this morning in which he sang your praisesvery loudly.'
"'I was just looking for the offices when you came.'
"'We have not got our name up yet, for we only secured thesetemporary premises last week. Come up with me, and we will talk thematter over.'
"I followed him to the top of a very lofty stair, and there, rightunder the slates, were a couple of empty, dusty little rooms,uncarpeted and uncurtained, into which he led me. I had thought of agreat office with shining tables and rows of clerks, such as I wasused to, and I dare say I stared rather straight at the two dealchairs and one little table, which, with a ledger and a waste paperbasket, made up the whole furniture.
"'Don't be disheartened, Mr. Pycroft,' said my new acquaintance,seeing the length of my face. 'Rome was not built in a day, and wehave lots of money at our backs, though we don't cut much dash yet inoffices. Pray sit down, and let me have your letter.'
"I gave it to him, and her read it over very carefully.
"'You seem to have made a vast impression upon my brother Arthur,'said he; 'and I know that he is a pretty shrewd judge. He swears byLondon, you know; and I by Birmingham; but this time I shall followhis advice. Pray consider yourself definitely engaged.'
"'What are my duties?' I asked.
"'You will eventually manage the great depot in Paris, which willpour a flood of English crockery into the shops of a hundred andthirty-four agents in France. The purchase will be completed in aweek, and meanwhile you will remain in Birmingham and make yourselfuseful.'
"'How?'
"For answer, he took a big red book out of a drawer.
"'This is a directory of Paris,' said he, 'with the trades after thenames of the people. I want you to take it home with you, and to markoff all the hardware sellers, with their addresses. It would be ofthe greatest use to me to have them.'
"'Surely there are classified lists?' I suggested.
"'Not reliable ones. Their system is different from ours. Stick atit, and let me have the lists by Monday, at twelve. Good-day, Mr.Pycroft. If you continue to show zeal and intelligence you will findthe company a good master.'
"I went back to the hotel with the big book under my arm, and withvery conflicting feelings in my breast. On the one hand, I wasdefinitely engaged and had a hundred pounds in my pocket; on theother, the look of the offices, the absence of name on the wall, andother of the points which would strike a business man had left a badimpression as to the position of my employers. However, come whatmight, I had my money, so I settled down to my task. All Sunday I waskept hard at work, and yet by Monday I had only got as far as H. Iwent round to my employer, found him in the same dismantled kind ofroom, and was told to keep at it until Wednesday, and then comeagain. On Wednesday it was still unfinished, so I hammered away untilFriday--that is, yesterday. Then I brought it round to Mr. HarryPinner.
"'Thank you very much,' said he; 'I fear that I underrated thedifficulty of the task. This list will be of very material assistanceto me.'
"'It took some time,' said I.
"'And now,' said he, 'I want you to make a list of the furnitureshops, for they all sell crockery.'
"'Very good.'
"'And you can come up to-morrow evening, at seven, and let me knowhow you are getting on. Don't overwork yourself. A couple of hours atDay's Music Hall in the evening would do you no harm after yourlabors.' He laughed as he spoke, and I saw with a thrill that hissecond tooth upon the left-hand side had been very badly stuffed withgold."
Sherlock Holmes rubbed his hands with delight, and I stared withastonishment at our client.
"You may well look surprised, Dr. Watson; but it is this way," saidhe: "When I was speaking to the other chap in London, at the timethat he laughed at my not going to Mawson's, I happened to noticethat his tooth was stuffed in this very identical fashion. The glintof the gold in each case caught my eye, you see. When I put that withthe voice and figure being the same, and only those things alteredwhich might be changed by a razor or a wig, I could not doubt that itwas the same man. Of course you expect two brothers to be alike, butnot that they should have the same tooth stuffed in the same way. Hebowed me out, and I found myself in the street, hardly knowingwhether I was on my head or my heels. Back I went to my hotel, put myhead in a basin of cold water, and tried to think it out. Why had hesent me from London to Birmingham? Why had he got there before me?And why had he written a letter from himself to himself? It wasaltogether too much for me, and I could make no sense of it. And thensuddenly it struck me that what was dark to me might be very light toMr. Sherlock Holmes. I had just time to get up to town by the nighttrain to see him this morning, and to bring you both back with me toBirmingham."
There was a pause after the stock-broker's clerk had concluded hissurprising experience. Then Sherlock Holmes cocked his eye at me,leaning back on the cushions with a pleased and yet critical face,like a connoisseur who has just taken his first sip of a cometvintage.
"Rather fine, Watson, is it not?" said he. "There are points in itwhich please me. I think that you will agree with me that aninterview with Mr. Arthur Harry Pinner in the temporary offices ofthe Franco-Midland Hardware Company, Limited, would be a ratherinteresting experience for both of us."
"But how can we do it?" I asked.
"Oh, easily enough," said Hall Pycroft, cheerily. "You are twofriends of mine who are in want of a billet, and what could be morenatural than that I should bring you both round to the managingdirector?"
"Quite so, of course," said Holmes. "I should like to have a look atthe gentleman, and see if I can make anything of his little game.What qualities have you, my friend, which would make your services sovaluable? Or is it possible that--" He began biting his nails andstaring blankly out of the window, and we hardly drew another wordfrom him until we were in New Street.
At seven o'clock that evening we were walking, the three of us, downCorporation Street to the company's offices.
"It is no use our being at all before our time," said our client. "Heonly comes there to see me, apparently, for the place is deserted upto the very hour he names."
"That is suggestive," remarked Holmes.
"By Jove, I told you so!" cried the clerk. "That's he walking aheadof us there."
He pointed to a smallish, dark, well-dressed man who was bustlingalong the other side of the road. As we watched him he looked acrossat a boy who was bawling out the latest edition of the evening paper,and running over among the cabs and busses, he bought one from him.Then, clutching it in his hand, he vanished through a door-way.
"There he goes!" cried Hall Pycroft. "These are the company's officesinto which he has gone. Come with me, and I'll fix it up as easily aspossible."
Following his lead, we ascended five stories, until we foundourselves outside a half-opened door, at which our client tapped. Avoice within bade us enter, and we entered a bare, unfurnished roomsuch as Hall Pycroft had described. At the single table sat the manwhom we had seen in the street, with his evening paper spread out infront of him, and as he looked up at us it seemed to me that I hadnever looked upon a face which bore such marks of grief, and ofsomething beyond grief--of a horror such as comes to few men in alifetime. His brow glistened with perspiration, his cheeks were ofthe dull, dead white of a fish's belly, and his eyes were wild andstaring. He looked at his clerk as though he failed to recognize him,and I could see by the astonishment depicted upon our conductor'sface that this was by no means the usual appearance of his employer.
"You look ill, Mr. Pinner!" he exclaimed.
"Yes, I am not very well," answered the other, making obvious effortsto pull himself together, and licking his dry lips before he spoke."Who are these gentlemen whom you have brought with you?"
"One is Mr. Harris, of Bermondsey, and the other is Mr. Price, ofthis town," said our clerk, glibly. "They are friends of mine andgentlemen of experience, but they have been out of a place for somelittle time, and they hoped that perhaps you might find an openingfor them in the company's employment."
"Very possibly! Very possibly!" cried Mr. Pinner with a ghastlysmile. "Yes, I have no doubt that we shall be able to do somethingfor you. What is your particular line, Mr. Harris?"
"I am an accountant," said Holmes.
"Ah yes, we shall want something of the sort. And you, Mr. Price?"
"A clerk," said I.
"I have every hope that the company may accommodate you. I will letyou know about it as soon as we come to any conclusion. And now I begthat you will go. For God's sake leave me to myself!"
These last words were shot out of him, as though the constraint whichhe was evidently setting upon himself had suddenly and utterly burstasunder. Holmes and I glanced at each other, and Hall Pycroft took astep towards the table.
"You forget, Mr. Pinner, that I am here by appointment to receivesome directions from you," said he.
"Certainly, Mr. Pycroft, certainly," the other resumed in a calmertone. "You may wait here a moment; and there is no reason why yourfriends should not wait with you. I will be entirely at your servicein three minutes, if I might trespass upon your patience so far." Herose with a very courteous air, and, bowing to us, he passed outthrough a door at the farther end of the room, which he closed behindhim.
"What now?" whispered Holmes. "Is he giving us the slip?"
"Impossible," answered Pycroft.
"Why so?"
"That door leads into an inner room."
"There is no exit?"
"None."
"Is it furnished?"
"It was empty yesterday."
"Then what on earth can he be doing? There is something which I don'tunderstand in his manner. If ever a man was three parts mad withterror, that man's name is Pinner. What can have put the shivers onhim?"
"He suspects that we are detectives," I suggested.
"That's it," cried Pycroft.
Holmes shook his head. "He did not turn pale. He was pale when weentered the room," said he. "It is just possible that--"
His words were interrupted by a sharp rat-tat from the direction ofthe inner door.
"What the deuce is he knocking at his own door for?" cried the clerk.
Again and much louder cam the rat-tat-tat. We all gazed expectantlyat the closed door. Glancing at Holmes, I saw his face turn rigid,and he leaned forward in intense excitement. Then suddenly came a lowguggling, gargling sound, and a brisk drumming upon woodwork. Holmessprang frantically across the room and pushed at the door. It wasfastened on the inner side. Following his example, we threw ourselvesupon it with all our weight. One hinge snapped, then the other, anddown came the door with a crash. Rushing over it, we found ourselvesin the inner room. It was empty.
But it was only for a moment that we were at fault. At one corner,the corner nearest the room which we had left, there was a seconddoor. Holmes sprang to it and pulled it open. A coat and waistcoatwere lying on the floor, and from a hook behind the door, with hisown braces round his neck, was hanging the managing director of theFranco-Midland Hardware Company. His knees were drawn up, his headhung at a dreadful angle to his body, and the clatter of his heelsagainst the door made the noise which had broken in upon ourconversation. In an instant I had caught him round the waist, andheld him up while Holmes and Pycroft untied the elastic bands whichhad disappeared between the livid creases of skin. Then we carriedhim into the other room, where he lay with a clay-colored face,puffing his purple lips in and out with every breath--a dreadfulwreck of all that he had been but five minutes before.
"What do you think of him, Watson?" asked Holmes.
I stooped over him and examined him. His pulse was feeble andintermittent, but his breathing grew longer, and there was a littleshivering of his eyelids, which showed a thin white slit of ballbeneath.
"It has been touch and go with him," said I, "but he'll live now.Just open that window, and hand me the water carafe." I undid hiscollar, poured the cold water over his face, and raised and sank hisarms until he drew a long, natural breath. "It's only a question oftime now," said I, as I turned away from him.
Holmes stood by the table, with his hands deep in his trouser'spockets and his chin upon his breast.
"I suppose we ought to call the police in now," said he. "And yet Iconfess that I'd like to give them a complete case when they come."
"It's a blessed mystery to me," cried Pycroft, scratching his head."Whatever they wanted to bring me all the way up here for, andthen--"
"Pooh! All that is clear enough," said Holmes impatiently. "It isthis last sudden move."
"You understand the rest, then?"
"I think that it is fairly obvious. What do you say, Watson?"
I shrugged my shoulders. "I must confess that I am out of my depths,"said I.
"Oh surely if you consider the events at first they can only point toone conclusion."
"What do you make of them?"
"Well, the whole thing hinges upon two points. The first is themaking of Pycroft write a declaration by which he entered the serviceof this preposterous company. Do you not see how very suggestive thatis?"
"I am afraid I miss the point."
"Well, why did they want him to do it? Not as a business matter, forthese arrangements are usually verbal, and there was no earthlybusiness reason why this should be an exception. Don't you see, myyoung friend, that they were very anxious to obtain a specimen ofyour handwriting, and had no other way of doing it?"
"And why?"
"Quite so. Why? When we answer that we have made some progress withour little problem. Why? There can be only one adequate reason.Someone wanted to learn to imitate your writing, and had to procure aspecimen of it first. And now if we pass on to the second point wefind that each throws light upon the other. That point is the requestmade by Pinner that you should not resign your place, but shouldleave the manager of this important business in the full expectationthat a Mr. Hall Pycroft, whom he had never seen, was about to enterthe office upon the Monday morning."
"My God!" cried our client, "what a blind beetle I have been!"
"Now you see the point about the handwriting. Suppose that some oneturned up in your place who wrote a completely different hand fromthat in which you had applied for the vacancy, of course the gamewould have been up. But in the interval the rogue had learned toimitate you, and his position was therefore secure, as I presume thatnobody in the office had ever set eyes upon you."
"Not a soul," groaned Hall Pycroft.
"Very good. Of course it was of the utmost importance to prevent youfrom thinking better of it, and also to keep you from coming intocontact with any one who might tell you that your double was at workin Mawson's office. Therefore they gave you a handsome advance onyour salary, and ran you off to the Midlands, where they gave youenough work to do to prevent your going to London, where you mighthave burst their little game up. That is all plain enough."
"But why should this man pretend to be his own brother?"
"Well, that is pretty clear also. There are evidently only two ofthem in it. The other is impersonating you at the office. This oneacted as your engager, and then found that he could not find you anemployer without admitting a third person into his plot. That he wasmost unwilling to do. He changed his appearance as far as he could,and trusted that the likeness, which you could not fail to observe,would be put down to a family resemblance. But for the happy chanceof the gold stuffing, your suspicions would probably never have beenaroused."
Hall Pycroft shook his clinched hands in the air. "Good Lord!" hecried, "while I have been fooled in this way, what has this otherHall Pycroft been doing at Mawson's? What should we do, Mr. Holmes?Tell me what to do."
"We must wire to Mawson's."
"They shut at twelve on Saturdays."
"Never mind. There may be some door-keeper or attendant--"
"Ah yes, they keep a permanent guard there on account of the value ofthe securities that they hold. I remember hearing it talked of in theCity."
"Very good; we shall wire to him, and see if all is well, and if aclerk of your name is working there. That is clear enough; but whatis not so clear is why at sight of us one of the rogues shouldinstantly walk out of the room and hang himself."
"The paper!" croaked a voice behind us. The man was sitting up,blanched and ghastly, with returning reason in his eyes, and handswhich rubbed nervously at the broad red band which still encircledhis throat.
"The paper! Of course!" yelled Holmes, in a paroxysm of excitement."Idiot that I was! I thought so must of our visit that the papernever entered my head for an instant. To be sure, the secret must bethere." He flattened it out upon the table, and a cry of triumphburst from his lips. "Look at this, Watson," he cried. "It is aLondon paper, an early edition of the Evening Standard. Here is whatwe want. Look at the headlines: 'Crime in the City. Murder at Mawson& Williams's. Gigantic attempted Robbery. Capture of the Criminal.'Here, Watson, we are all equally anxious to hear it, so kindly readit aloud to us."
It appeared from its position in the paper to have been the one eventof importance in town, and the account of it ran in this way:
"A desperate attempt at robbery, culminating in the death of one manand the capture of the criminal, occurred this afternoon in the City.For some time back Mawson & Williams, the famous financial house,have been the guardians of securities which amount in the aggregateto a sum of considerably over a million sterling. So conscious wasthe manager of the responsibility which devolved upon him inconsequence of the great interests at stake that safes of the verylatest construction have been employed, and an armed watchman hasbeen left day and night in the building. It appears that last week anew clerk named Hall Pycroft was engaged by the firm. This personappears to have been none other that Beddington, the famous forgerand cracksman, who, with his brother, had only recently emerged froma five years' spell of penal servitude. By some means, which are notyet clear, he succeeded in winning, under a false name, this officialposition in the office, which he utilized in order to obtain mouldingof various locks, and a thorough knowledge of the position of thestrong room and the safes."It is customary at Mawson's for the clerks to leave at midday onSaturday. Sergeant Tuson, of the City Police, was somewhat surprised,therefore to see a gentleman with a carpet bag come down the steps attwenty minutes past one. His suspicions being aroused, the sergeantfollowed the man, and with the aid of Constable Pollack succeeded,after a most desperate resistance, in arresting him. It was at onceclear that a daring and gigantic robbery had been committed. Nearly ahundred thousand pounds' worth of American railway bonds, with alarge amount of scrip in mines and other companies, was discovered inthe bag. On examining the premises the body of the unfortunatewatchman was found doubled up and thrust into the largest of thesafes, where it would not have been discovered until Monday morninghad it not been for the prompt action of Sergeant Tuson. The man'sskull had been shattered by a blow from a poker delivered frombehind. There could be no doubt that Beddington had obtained entranceby pretending that he had left something behind him, and havingmurdered the watchman, rapidly rifled the large safe, and then madeoff with his booty. His brother, who usually works with him, has notappeared in this job as far as can at present be ascertained,although the police are making energetic inquiries as to hiswhereabouts."
"Well, we may save the police some little trouble in that direction,"said Holmes, glancing at the haggard figure huddled up by the window."Human nature is a strange mixture, Watson. You see that even avillain and murderer can inspire such affection that his brotherturns to suicide when he learns that his neck is forfeited. However,we have no choice as to our action. The doctor and I will remain onguard, Mr. Pycroft, if you will have the kindness to step out for thepolice."





                          THE "GLORIA SCOTT"
"I have some papers here," said my friend Sherlock Holmes, as we satone winter's night on either side of the fire, "which I really think,Watson, that it would be worth your while to glance over. These arethe documents in the extraordinary case of the Gloria Scott, and thisis the message which struck Justice of the Peace Trevor dead withhorror when he read it."
He had picked from a drawer a little tarnished cylinder, and, undoingthe tape, he handed me a short note scrawled upon a half-sheet ofslate gray-paper.
"The supply of game for London is going steadily up," it ran."Head-keeper Hudson, we believe, has been now told to receive allorders for fly-paper and for preservation of your hen-pheasant'slife."
As I glanced up from reading this enigmatical message, I saw Holmeschuckling at the expression upon my face.
"You look a little bewildered," said he.
"I cannot see how such a message as this could inspire horror. Itseems to me to be rather grotesque than otherwise."
"Very likely. Yet the fact remains that the reader, who was a fine,robust old man, was knocked clean down by it as if it had been thebutt end of a pistol."
"You arouse my curiosity," said I. "But why did you say just now thatthere were very particular reasons why I should study this case?"
"Because it was the first in which I was ever engaged."
I had often endeavored to elicit from my companion what had firstturned his mind in the direction of criminal research, but had nevercaught him before in a communicative humor. Now he sat forward in hisarm-chair and spread out the documents upon his knees. Then he lithis pipe and sat for some time smoking and turning them over.
"You never heard me talk of Victor Trevor?" he asked. "He was theonly friend I made during the two years I was at college. I was nevera very sociable fellow, Watson, always rather fond of moping in myrooms and working out my own little methods of thought, so that Inever mixed much with the men of my year. Bar fencing and boxing Ihad few athletic tastes, and then my line of study was quite distinctfrom that of the other fellows, so that we had no points of contactat all. Trevor was the only man I knew, and that only through theaccident of his bull terrier freezing on to my ankle one morning as Iwent down to chapel.
"It was a prosaic way of forming a friendship, but it was effective.I was laid by the heels for ten days, but Trevor used to come in toinquire after me. At first it was only a minute's chat, but soon hisvisits lengthened, and before the end of the term we were closefriends. He was a hearty, full-blooded fellow, full of spirits andenergy, the very opposite to me in most respects, but we had somesubjects in common, and it was a bond of union when I found that hewas as friendless as I. Finally, he invited me down to his father'splace at Donnithorpe, in Norfolk, and I accepted his hospitality fora month of the long vacation.
"Old Trevor was evidently a man of some wealth and consideration, aJ.P., and a landed proprietor. Donnithorpe is a little hamlet just tothe north of Langmere, in the country of the Broads. The house was anold-fashioned, wide-spread, oak-beamed brick building, with a finelime-lined avenue leading up to it. There was excellent wild-duckshooting in the fens, remarkably good fishing, a small but selectlibrary, taken over, as I understood, from a former occupant, and atolerable cook, so that he would be a fastidious man who could notput in a pleasant month there.
"Trevor senior was a widower, and my friend his only son.
"There had been a daughter, I heard, but she had died of diphtheriawhile on a visit to Birmingham. The father interested me extremely.He was a man of little culture, but with a considerable amount ofrude strength, both physically and mentally. He knew hardly anybooks, but he had traveled far, had seen much of the world. And hadremembered all that he had learned. In person he was a thick-set,burly man with a shock of grizzled hair, a brown, weather-beatenface, and blue eyes which were keen to the verge of fierceness. Yethe had a reputation for kindness and charity on the country-side, andwas noted for the leniency of his sentences from the bench.
"One evening, shortly after my arrival, we were sitting over a glassof port after dinner, when young Trevor began to talk about thosehabits of observation and inference which I had already formed into asystem, although I had not yet appreciated the part which they wereto play in my life. The old man evidently thought that his son wasexaggerating in his description of one or two trivial feats which Ihad performed.
"'Come, now, Mr. Holmes,' said he, laughing good-humoredly. 'I'm anexcellent subject, if you can deduce anything from me.'
"'I fear there is not very much,' I answered; 'I might suggest thatyou have gone about in fear of some personal attack within the lasttwelve months.'
"The laugh faded from his lips, and he stared at me in greatsurprise.
"'Well, that's true enough,' said he. 'You know, Victor,' turning tohis son, 'when we broke up that poaching gang they swore to knife us,and Sir Edward Holly has actually been attacked. I've always been onmy guard since then, though I have no idea how you know it.'
"'You have a very handsome stick,' I answered. 'By the inscription Iobserved that you had not had it more than a year. But you have takensome pains to bore the head of it and pour melted lead into the holeso as to make it a formidable weapon. I argued that you would nottake such precautions unless you had some danger to fear.'
"'Anything else?' he asked, smiling.
"'You have boxed a good deal in your youth.'
"'Right again. How did you know it?  Is my nose knocked a little outof the straight?'
"'No,' said I. 'It is your ears. They have the peculiar flatteningand thickening which marks the boxing man.'
"'Anything else?'
"'You have done a good deal of digging by your callosities.'
"'Made all my money at the gold fields.'
"'You have been in New Zealand.'
"'Right again.'
"'You have visited Japan.'
"'Quite true.'
"'And you have been most intimately associated with some one whoseinitials were J. A., and whom you afterwards were eager to entirelyforget.'
"Mr. Trevor stood slowly up, fixed his large blue eyes upon me with astrange wild stare, and then pitched forward, with his face among thenutshells which strewed the cloth, in a dead faint.
"You can imagine, Watson, how shocked both his son and I were. Hisattack did not last long, however, for when we undid his collar, andsprinkled the water from one of the finger-glasses over his face, hegave a gasp or two and sat up.
"'Ah, boys,' said he, forcing a smile, 'I hope I haven't frightenedyou. Strong as I look, there is a weak place in my heart, and it doesnot take much to knock me over. I don't know how you manage this, Mr.Holmes, but it seems to me that all the detectives of fact and offancy would be children in your hands. That's your line of life, sir,and you may take the word of a man who has seen something of theworld.'
"And that recommendation, with the exaggerated estimate of my abilitywith which he prefaced it, was, if you will believe me, Watson, thevery first thing which ever made me feel that a profession might bemade out of what had up to that time been the merest hobby. At themoment, however, I was too much concerned at the sudden illness of myhost to think of anything else.
"'I hope that I have said nothing to pain you?' said I.
"'Well, you certainly touched upon rather a tender point. Might I askhow you know, and how much you know?' He spoke now in a half-jestingfashion, but a look of terror still lurked at the back of his eyes.
"'It is simplicity itself,' said I. 'When you bared your arm to drawthat fish into the boat I saw that J. A. had been tattooed in thebend of the elbow. The letters were still legible, but it wasperfectly clear from their blurred appearance, and from the stainingof the skin round them, that efforts had been made to obliteratethem. It was obvious, then, that those initials had once been veryfamiliar to you, and that you had afterwards wished to forget them.'
"'What an eye you have!' he cried, with a sigh of relief. 'It is justas you say. But we won't talk of it. Of all ghosts the ghosts of ourold lovers are the worst. Come into the billiard-room and have aquiet cigar.'
"From that day, amid all his cordiality, there was always a touch ofsuspicion in Mr. Trevor's manner towards me. Even his son remarkedit. 'You've given the governor such a turn,' said he, 'that he'llnever be sure again of what you know and what you don't know.' He didnot mean to show it, I am sure, but it was so strongly in his mindthat it peeped out at every action. At last I became so convincedthat I was causing him uneasiness that I drew my visit to a close. Onthe very day, however, before I left, an incident occurred whichproved in the sequel to be of importance.
"We were sitting out upon the lawn on garden chairs, the three of us,basking in the sun and admiring the view across the Broads, when amaid came out to say that there was a man at the door who wanted tosee Mr. Trevor.
"'What is his name?' asked my host.
"'He would not give any.'
"'What does he want, then?'
"'He says that you know him, and that he only wants a moment'sconversation.'
"'Show him round here.' An instant afterwards there appeared a littlewizened fellow with a cringing manner and a shambling style ofwalking. He wore an open jacket, with a splotch of tar on the sleeve,a red-and-black check shirt, dungaree trousers, and heavy boots badlyworn. His face was thin and brown and crafty, with a perpetual smileupon it, which showed an irregular line of yellow teeth, and hiscrinkled hands were half closed in a way that is distinctive ofsailors. As he came slouching across the lawn I heard Mr. Trevor makea sort of hiccoughing noise in his throat, and jumping out of hischair, he ran into the house. He was back in a moment, and I smelt astrong reek of brandy as he passed me.
"'Well, my man,' said he. 'What can I do for you?'
"The sailor stood looking at him with puckered eyes, and with thesame loose-lipped smile upon his face.
"'You don't know me?' he asked.
"'Why, dear me, it is surely Hudson,' said Mr. Trevor in a tone ofsurprise.
"'Hudson it is, sir,' said the seaman. 'Why, it's thirty year andmore since I saw you last. Here you are in your house, and me stillpicking my salt meat out of the harness cask.'
"'Tut, you will find that I have not forgotten old times,' cried Mr.Trevor, and, walking towards the sailor, he said something in a lowvoice. 'Go into the kitchen,' he continued out loud, 'and you willget food and drink. I have no doubt that I shall find you asituation.'
"'Thank you, sir,' said the seaman, touching his fore-lock. 'I'm justoff a two-yearer in an eight-knot tramp, short-handed at that, and Iwants a rest. I thought I'd get it either with Mr. Beddoes or withyou.'
"'Ah!' cried Trevor. 'You know where Mr. Beddoes is?'
"'Bless you, sir, I know where all my old friends are,' said thefellow with a sinister smile, and he slouched off after the maid tothe kitchen. Mr. Trevor mumbled something to us about having beenshipmate with the man when he was going back to the diggings, andthen, leaving us on the lawn, he went indoors. An hour later, when weentered the house, we found him stretched dead drunk upon thedining-room sofa. The whole incident left a most ugly impression uponmy mind, and I was not sorry next day to leave Donnithorpe behind me,for I felt that my presence must be a source of embarrassment to myfriend.
"All this occurred during the first month of the long vacation. Iwent up to my London rooms, where I spent seven weeks working out afew experiments in organic chemistry. One day, however, when theautumn was far advanced and the vacation drawing to a close, Ireceived a telegram from my friend imploring me to return toDonnithorpe, and saying that he was in great need of my advice andassistance. Of course I dropped everything and set out for the Northonce more.
"He met me with the dog-cart at the station, and I saw at a glancethat the last two months had been very trying ones for him. He hadgrown thin and careworn, and had lost the loud, cheery manner forwhich he had been remarkable.
"'The governor is dying,' were the first words he said.
"'Impossible!' I cried. 'What is the matter?'
"'Apoplexy. Nervous shock, He's been on the verge all day. I doubt ifwe shall find him alive.'
"I was, as you may think, Watson, horrified at this unexpected news.
"'What has caused it?' I asked.
"'Ah, that is the point. Jump in and we can talk it over while wedrive. You remember that fellow who came upon the evening before youleft us?'
"'Perfectly.'
"'Do you know who it was that we let into the house that day?'
"'I have no idea.'
"'It was the devil, Holmes,' he cried.
"I stared at him in astonishment.
"'Yes, it was the devil himself. We have not had a peaceful hoursince--not one. The governor has never held up his head from thatevening, and now the life has been crushed out of him and his heartbroken, all through this accursed Hudson.'
"'What power had he, then?'
"'Ah, that is what I would give so much to know. The kindly,charitable, good old governor--how could he have fallen into theclutches of such a ruffian! But I am so glad that you have come,Holmes. I trust very much to your judgment and discretion, and I knowthat you will advise me for the best.'
"We were dashing along the smooth white country road, with the longstretch of the Broads in front of us glimmering in the red light ofthe setting sun. From a grove upon our left I could already see thehigh chimneys and the flag-staff which marked the squire's dwelling.
"'My father made the fellow gardener,' said my companion, 'and then,as that did not satisfy him, he was promoted to be butler. The houseseemed to be at his mercy, and he wandered about and did what hechose in it. The maids complained of his drunken habits and his vilelanguage. The dad raised their wages all round to recompense them forthe annoyance. The fellow would take the boat and my father's bestgun and treat himself to little shooting trips. And all this withsuch a sneering, leering, insolent face that I would have knocked himdown twenty times over if he had been a man of my own age. I tellyou, Holmes, I have had to keep a tight hold upon myself all thistime; and now I am asking myself whether, if I had let myself go alittle more, I might not have been a wiser man.
"'Well, matters went from bad to worse with us, and this animalHudson became more and more intrusive, until at last, on making someinsolent reply to my father in my presence one day, I took him by theshoulders and turned him out of the room. He slunk away with a lividface and two venomous eyes which uttered more threats than his tonguecould do. I don't know what passed between the poor dad and him afterthat, but the dad came to me next day and asked me whether I wouldmind apologizing to Hudson. I refused, as you can imagine, and askedmy father how he could allow such a wretch to take such libertieswith himself and his household.
"'"Ah, my boy," said he, "it is all very well to talk, but you don'tknow how I am placed. But you shall know, Victor. I'll see that youshall know, come what may. You wouldn't believe harm of your poor oldfather, would you, lad?" He was very much moved, and shut himself upin the study all day, where I could see through the window that hewas writing busily.
"'That evening there came what seemed to me to be a grand release,for Hudson told us that he was going to leave us. He walked into thedining-room as we sat after dinner, and announced his intention inthe thick voice of a half-drunken man.
"'"I've had enough of Norfolk," said he. "I'll run down to Mr.Beddoes in Hampshire. He'll be as glad to see me as you were, I daresay."
"'"You're not going away in any kind of spirit, Hudson, I hope," saidmy father, with a tameness which mad my blood boil.
"'"I've not had my 'pology," said he sulkily, glancing in mydirection.
"'"Victor, you will acknowledge that you have used this worthy fellowrather roughly," said the dad, turning to me.
"'"On the contrary, I think that we have both shown extraordinarypatience towards him," I answered.
"'"Oh, you do, do you?" he snarls. "Very good, mate. We'll see aboutthat!"
"'He slouched out of the room, and half an hour afterwards left thehouse, leaving my father in a state of pitiable nervousness. Nightafter night I heard him pacing his room, and it was just as he wasrecovering his confidence that the blow did at last fall.'
"'And how?' I asked eagerly.
"'In a most extraordinary fashion. A letter arrived for my fatheryesterday evening, bearing the Fordingbridge post-mark. My fatherread it, clapped both his hands to his head, and began running roundthe room in little circles like a man who has been driven out of hissenses. When I at last drew him down on to the sofa, his mouth andeyelids were all puckered on one side, and I saw that he had astroke. Dr. Fordham came over at once. We put him to bed; but theparalysis has spread, he has shown no sign of returningconsciousness, and I think that we shall hardly find him alive.'
"'You horrify me, Trevor!' I cried. 'What then could have been inthis letter to cause so dreadful a result?'
"'Nothing. There lies the inexplicable part of it. The message wasabsurd and trivial. Ah, my God, it is as I feared!'
"As he spoke we came round the curve of the avenue, and saw in thefading light that every blind in the house had been drawn down. As wedashed up to the door, my friend's face convulsed with grief, agentleman in black emerged from it.
"'When did it happen, doctor?' asked Trevor.
"'Almost immediately after you left.'
"'Did he recover consciousness?'
"'For an instant before the end.'
"'Any message for me?'
"'Only that the papers were in the back drawer of the Japanesecabinet.'
"My friend ascended with the doctor to the chamber of death, while Iremained in the study, turning the whole matter over and over in myhead, and feeling as sombre as ever I had done in my life. What wasthe past of this Trevor, pugilist, traveler, and gold-digger, and howhad he placed himself in the power of this acid-faced seaman?  Why,too, should he faint at an allusion to the half-effaced initials uponhis arm, and die of fright when he had a letter from Fordingham? Then I remembered that Fordingham was in Hampshire, and that this Mr.Beddoes, whom the seaman had gone to visit and presumably toblackmail, had also been mentioned as living in Hampshire. Theletter, then, might either come from Hudson, the seaman, saying thathe had betrayed the guilty secret which appeared to exist, or itmight come from Beddoes, warning an old confederate that such abetrayal was imminent. So far it seemed clear enough. But then howcould this letter be trivial and grotesque, as described by the son? He must have misread it. If so, it must have been one of thoseingenious secret codes which mean one thing while they seem to meananother. I must see this letter. If there were a hidden meaning init, I was confident that I could pluck it forth. For an hour I satpondering over it in the gloom, until at last a weeping maid broughtin a lamp, and close at her heels came my friend Trevor, pale butcomposed, with these very papers which lie upon my knee held in hisgrasp. He sat down opposite to me, drew the lamp to the edge of thetable, and handed me a short note scribbled, as you see, upon asingle sheet of gray paper. 'The supply of game for London is goingsteadily up,' it ran. 'Head-keeper Hudson, we believe, has been nowtold to receive all orders for fly-paper and for preservation of yourhen-pheasant's life.'
"I dare say my face looked as bewildered as yours did just now whenfirst I read this message. Then I reread it very carefully. It wasevidently as I had thought, and some secret meaning must lie buriedin this strange combination of words. Or could it be that there was aprearranged significance to such phrases as 'fly-paper' and'hen-pheasant'?  Such a meaning would be arbitrary and could not bededuced in any way. And yet I was loath to believe that this was thecase, and the presence of the word Hudson seemed to show that thesubject of the message was as I had guessed, and that it was fromBeddoes rather than the sailor. I tried it backwards, but thecombination 'life pheasant's hen' was not encouraging. Then I triedalternate words, but neither 'the of for' nor 'supply game London'promised to throw any light upon it.
"And then in an instant the key of the riddle was in my hands, and Isaw that every third word, beginning with the first, would give amessage which might well drive old Trevor to despair.
"It was short and terse, the warning, as I now read it to mycompanion:
"'The game is up. Hudson has told all. Fly for your life.'
"Victor Trevor sank his face into his shaking hands, 'It must bethat, I suppose,' said he. "This is worse than death, for it meansdisgrace as well. But what is the meaning of these "head-keepers" and"hen-pheasants"?
"'It means nothing to the message, but it might mean a good deal tous if we had no other means of discovering the sender. You see thathe has begun by writing "The ... game ... is," and so on. Afterwardshe had, to fulfill the prearranged cipher, to fill in any two wordsin each space. He would naturally use the first words which came tohis mind, and if there were so many which referred to sport amongthem, you may be tolerably sure that he is either an ardent shot orinterested in breeding. Do you know anything of this Beddoes?'
"'Why, now that you mention it,' said he, 'I remember that my poorfather used to have an invitation from him to shoot over hispreserves every autumn.'
"'Then it is undoubtedly from him that the note comes,' said I. 'Itonly remains for us to find out what this secret was which the sailorHudson seems to have held over the heads of these two wealthy andrespected men.'
"'Alas, Holmes, I fear that it is one of sin and shame!' cried myfriend. 'But from you I shall have no secrets. Here is the statementwhich was drawn up by my father when he knew that the danger fromHudson had become imminent. I found it in the Japanese cabinet, as hetold the doctor. Take it and read it to me, for I have neither thestrength nor the courage to do it myself.'
"These are the very papers, Watson, which he handed to me, and I willread them to you, as I read them in the old study that night to him.They are endorsed outside, as you see, 'Some particulars of thevoyage of the bark Gloria Scott, from her leaving Falmouth on the 8thOctober, 1855, to her destruction in N. Lat. 15 20', W. Long. 2514' on Nov. 6th.' It is in the form of a letter, and runs in thisway:
"'My dear, dear son, now that approaching disgrace begins to darkenthe closing years of my life, I can write with all truth and honestythat it is not the terror of the law, it is not the loss of myposition in the county, nor is it my fall in the eyes of all who haveknown me, which cuts me to the heart; but it is the thought that youshould come to blush for me--you who love me and who have seldom, Ihope, had reason to do other than respect me. But if the blow fallswhich is forever hanging over me, then I should wish you to readthis, that you may know straight from me how far I have been toblame. On the other hand, if all should go well (which may kind GodAlmighty grant!), then if by any chance this paper should be stillundestroyed and should fall into your hands, I conjure you, by allyou hold sacred, by the memory of your dear mother, and by the lovewhich had been between us, to hurl it into the fire and to never giveone thought to it again.
"'If then your eye goes onto read this line, I know that I shallalready have been exposed and dragged from my home, or as is morelikely, for you know that my heart is weak, by lying with my tonguesealed forever in death. In either case the time for suppression ispast, and every word which I tell you is the naked truth, and this Iswear as I hope for mercy.
"'My name, dear lad, is not Trevor. I was James Armitage in myyounger days, and you can understand now the shock that it was to mea few weeks ago when your college friend addressed me in words whichseemed to imply that he had surprised my secret. As Armitage it wasthat I entered a London banking-house, and as Armitage I wasconvicted of breaking my country's laws, and was sentenced totransportation. Do not think very harshly of me, laddie. It was adebt of honor, so called, which I had to pay, and I used money whichwas not my own to do it, in the certainty that I could replace itbefore there could be any possibility of its being missed. But themost dreadful ill-luck pursued me. The money which I had reckonedupon never came to hand, and a premature examination of accountsexposed my deficit. The case might have been dealt leniently with,but the laws were more harshly administered thirty years ago thannow, and on my twenty-third birthday I found myself chained as afelon with thirty-seven other convicts in 'tween-decks of the barkGloria Scott, bound for Australia.
"'It was the year '55 when the Crimean war was at its height, and theold convict ships had been largely used as transports in the BlackSea. The government was compelled, therefore, to use smaller and lesssuitable vessels for sending out their prisoners. The Gloria Scotthad been in the Chinese tea-trade, but she was an old-fashioned,heavy-bowed, broad-beamed craft, and the new clippers had cut herout. She was a five-hundred-ton boat; and besides her thirty-eightjail-birds, she carried twenty-six of a crew, eighteen soldiers, acaptain, three mates, a doctor, a chaplain, and four warders. Nearlya hundred souls were in her, all told, when we set sail fromFalmouth.
"'The partitions between the cells of the convicts, instead of beingof thick oak, as is usual in convict-ships, were quite thin andfrail. The man next to me, upon the aft side, was one whom I hadparticularly noticed when we were led down the quay. He was a youngman with a clear, hairless face, a long, thin nose, and rathernut-cracker jaws. He carried his head very jauntily in the air, had aswaggering style of walking, and was, above all else, remarkable forhis extraordinary height. I don't think any of our heads would havecome up to his shoulder, and I am sure that he could not havemeasured less than six and a half feet. It was strange among so manysad and weary faces to see one which was full of energy andresolution. The sight of it was to me like a fire in a snow-storm. Iwas glad, then, to find that he was my neighbor, and gladder stillwhen, in the dead of the night, I heard a whisper close to my ear,and found that he had managed to cut an opening in the board whichseparated us.
"'"Hullo, chummy!" said he, "what's your name, and what are you herefor?"
"'I answered him, and asked in turn who I was talking with.
"'"I'm Jack Prendergast," said he, "and by God! You'll learn to blessmy name before you've done with me."
"'I remembered hearing of his case, for it was one which had made animmense sensation throughout the country some time before my ownarrest. He was a man of good family and of great ability, but ofincurably vicious habits, who had, by an ingenious system of fraud,obtained huge sums of money from the leading London merchants.
"'"Ha, ha! You remember my case!" said he proudly.
"'"Very well, indeed."
"'"Then maybe you remember something queer about it?"
"'"What was that, then?"
"'"I'd had nearly a quarter of a million, hadn't I?"
"'"So it was said."
"'"But none was recovered, eh?"
"'"No."
"'"Well, where d'ye suppose the balance is?" he asked.
"'"I have no idea," said I.
"'"Right between my finger and thumb," he cried. "By God! I've gotmore pounds to my name than you've hairs on your head. And if you'vemoney, my son, and know how to handle it and spread it, you can doanything. Now, you don't think it likely that a man who could doanything is going to wear his breeches out sitting in the stinkinghold of a rat-gutted, beetle-ridden, mouldy old coffin of a ChinChina coaster. No, sir, such a man will look after himself and willlook after his chums. You may lay to that! You hold on to him, andyou may kiss the book that he'll haul you through."
"'That was his style of talk, and at first I thought it meantnothing; but after a while, when he had tested me and sworn me inwith all possible solemnity, he let me understand that there reallywas a plot to gain command of the vessel. A dozen of the prisonershad hatched it before they came aboard, Prendergast was the leader,and his money was the motive power.
"'"I'd a partner," said he, "a rare good man, as true as a stock to abarrel. He's got the dibbs, he has, and where do you think he is atthis moment?  Why, he's the chaplain of this ship--the chaplain, noless! He came aboard with a black coat, and his papers right, andmoney enough in his box to buy the thing right up from keel tomain-truck. The crew are his, body and soul. He could buy 'em at somuch a gross with a cash discount, and he did it before ever theysigned on. He's got two of the warders and Mercer, the second mate,and he'd get the captain himself, if he thought him worth it."
"'"What are we to do, then?" I asked.
"'"What do you think?" said he. "We'll make the coats of some ofthese soldiers redder than ever the tailor did."
"'"But they are armed," said I.
"'"And so shall we be, my boy. There's a brace of pistols for everymother's son of us, and if we can't carry this ship, with the crew atour back, it's time we were all sent to a young misses'boarding-school. You speak to your mate upon the left to-night, andsee if he is to be trusted."
"'I did so, and found my other neighbor to be a young fellow in muchthe same position as myself, whose crime had been forgery. His namewas Evans, but he afterwards changed it, like myself, and he is now arich and prosperous man in the south of England. He was ready enoughto join the conspiracy, as the only means of saving ourselves, andbefore we had crossed the Bay there were only two of the prisonerswho were not in the secret. One of these was of weak mind, and we didnot dare to trust him, and the other was suffering from jaundice, andcould not be of any use to us.
"'From the beginning there was really nothing to prevent us fromtaking possession of the ship. The crew were a set of ruffians,specially picked for the job. The sham chaplain came into our cellsto exhort us, carrying a black bag, supposed to be full of tracts,and so often did he come that by the third day we had each stowedaway at the foot of our beds a file, a brace of pistols, a pound ofpowder, and twenty slugs. Two of the warders were agents ofPrendergast, and the second mate was his right-hand man. The captain,the two mates, two warders Lieutenant Martin, his eighteen soldiers,and the doctor were all that we had against us. Yet, safe as it was,we determined to neglect no precaution, and to make our attacksuddenly by night. It came, however, more quickly than we expected,and in this way.
"'One evening, about the third week after our start, the doctor hadcome down to see one of the prisoners who was ill, and putting hishand down on the bottom of his bunk he felt the outline of thepistols. If he had been silent he might have blown the whole thing,but he was a nervous little chap, so he gave a cry of surprise andturned so pale that the man knew what was up in an instant and seizedhim. He was gagged before he could give the alarm, and tied down uponthe bed. He had unlocked the door that led to the deck, and we werethrough it in a rush. The two sentries were shot down, and so was acorporal who came running to see what was the matter. There were twomore soldiers at the door of the state-room, and their muskets seemednot to be loaded, for they never fired upon us, and they were shotwhile trying to fix their bayonets. Then we rushed on into thecaptain's cabin, but as we pushed open the door there was anexplosion from within, and there he lay with his brains smeared overthe chart of the Atlantic which was pinned upon the table, while thechaplain stood with a smoking pistol in his hand at his elbow. Thetwo mates had both been seized by the crew, and the whole businessseemed to be settled.
"'The state-room was next the cabin, and we flocked in there andflopped down on the settees, all speaking together, for we were justmad with the feeling that we were free once more. There were lockersall round, and Wilson, the sham chaplain, knocked one of them in, andpulled out a dozen of brown sherry. We cracked off the necks of thebottles, poured the stuff out into tumblers, and were just tossingthem off, when in an instant without warning there came the roar ofmuskets in our ears, and the saloon was so full of smoke that wecould not see across the table. When it cleared again the place was ashambles. Wilson and eight others were wriggling on the top of eachother on the floor, and the blood and the brown sherry on that tableturn me sick now when I think of it. We were so cowed by the sightthat I think we should have given the job up if had not been forPrendergast. He bellowed like a bull and rushed for the door with allthat were left alive at his heels. Out we ran, and there on the poopwere the lieutenent and ten of his men. The swing skylights above thesaloon table had been a bit open, and they had fired on us throughthe slit.  We got on them before they could load, and they stood toit like men; but we had the upper hand of them, and in five minutesit was all over. My God! Was there ever a slaughter-house like thatship! Predergast was like a raging devil, and he picked the soldiersup as if they had been children and threw them overboard alive ordead. There was one sergeant that was horribly wounded and yet kepton swimming for a surprising time, until some one in mercy blew outhis brains. When the fighting was over there was no one left of ourenemies except just the warders, the mates, and the doctor.
"'It was over them that the great quarrel arose. There were many ofus who were glad enough to win back our freedom, and yet who had nowish to have murder on our souls. It was one thing to knock thesoldiers over with their muskets in their hands, and it was anotherto stand by while men were being killed in cold blood. Eight of us,five convicts and three sailors, said that we would not see it done.But there was no moving Predergast and those who were with him. Ouronly chance of safety lay in making a clean job of it, said he, andhe would not leave a tongue with power to wag in a witness-box. Itnearly came to our sharing the fate of the prisoners, but at last hesaid that if we wished we might take a boat and go. We jumped at theoffer, for we were already sick of these blookthirsty doings, and wesaw that there would be worse before it was done. We were given asuit of sailor togs each, a barrel of water, two casks, one of junkand one of biscuits, and a compass. Prendergast threw us over achart, told us that we were shipwrecked mariners whose ship hadfoundered in Lat. 15 and Long. 25 west, and then cut the painterand let us go.
"'And now I come to the most surprising part of my story, my dearson. The seamen had hauled the fore-yard aback during the rising, butnow as we left them they brought it square again, and as there was alight wind from the north and east the bark began to draw slowly awayfrom us. Our boat lay, rising and falling, upon the long, smoothrollers, and Evans and I, who were the most educated of the party,were sitting in the sheets working out our position and planning whatcoast we should make for. It was a nice question, for the Cape deVerds were about five hundred miles to the north of us, and theAfrican coast about seven hundred to the east. On the whole, as thewind was coming round to the north, we thought that Sierra Leonemight be best, and turned our head in that direction, the bark beingat that time nearly hull down on our starboard quarter. Suddenly aswe looked at her we saw a dense black cloud of smoke shoot up fromher, which hung like a monstrous tree upon the sky line. A fewseconds later a roar like thunder burst upon our ears, and as thesmoke thinned away there was no sign left of the Gloria Scott. In aninstant we swept the boat's head round again and pulled with all ourstrength for the place where the haze still trailing over the watermarked the scene of this catastrophe.
"'It was a long hour before we reached it, and at first we fearedthat we had come too late to save any one. A splintered boat and anumber of crates and fragments of spars rising and falling on thewaves showed us where the vessel had foundered; but there was no signof life, and we had turned away in despair when we heard a cry forhelp, and saw at some distance a piece of wreckage with a man lyingstretched across it. When we pulled him aboard the boat he proved tobe a young seaman of the name of Hudson, who was so burned andexhausted that he could give us no account of what had happened untilthe following morning.
"'It seemed that after we had left, Prendergast and his gang hadproceeded to put to death the five remaining prisoners. The twowarders had been shot and thrown overboard, and so also had the thirdmate. Prendergast then descended into the 'tween-decks and with hisown hands cut the throat of the unfortunate surgeon. There onlyremained the first mate, who was a bold and active man. When he sawthe convict approaching him with the bloody knife in his hand hekicked off his bonds, which he had somehow contrived to loosen, andrushing down the deck he plunged into the after-hold. A dozenconvicts, who descended with their pistols in search of him, foundhim with a match-box in his hand seated beside an open powder-barrel,which was one of a hundred carried on board, and swearing that hewould blow all hands up if he were in any way molested. An instantlater the explosion occurred, though Hudson thought it was caused bythe misdirected bullet of one of the convicts rather than the mate'smatch. Be the cause what I may, it was the end of the Gloria Scottand of the rabble who held command of her.
"'Such, in a few words, my dear boy, is the history of this terriblebusiness in which I was involved. Next day we were picked up by thebrig Hotspur, bound for Australia, whose captain found no difficultyin believing that we were the survivors of a passenger ship which hadfoundered. The transport ship Gloria Scott was set down by theAdmiralty as being lost at sea, and no word has ever leaked out as toher true fate. After an excellent voyage the Hotspur landed us atSydney, where Evans and I changed our names and made our way to thediggings, where, among the crowds who were gathered from all nations,we had no difficulty in losing our former identities. The rest I neednot relate. We prospered, we traveled, we came back as rich colonialsto England, and we bought country estates. For more than twenty yearswe have led peaceful and useful lives, and we hoped that our past wasforever buried. Imagine, then, my feelings when in the seaman whocame to us I recognized instantly the man who had been picked off thewreck. He had tracked us down somehow, and had set himself to liveupon our fears. You will understand now how it was that I strove tokeep the peace with him, and you will in some measure sympathize withme in the fears which fill me, now that he has gone from me to hisother victim with threats upon his tongue.'
"Underneath is written in a hand so shaky as to be hardly legible,'Beddoes writes in cipher to say H. has told all. Sweet Lord, havemercy on our souls!'
"That was the narrative which I read that night to young Trevor, andI think, Watson, that under the circumstances it was a dramatic one.The good fellow was heart-broken at it, and went out to the Terai teaplanting, where I hear that he is doing well. As to the sailor andBeddoes, neither of them was ever heard of again after that day onwhich the letter of warning was written. They both disappearedutterly and completely. No complaint had been lodged with the police,so that Beddoes had mistaken a threat for a deed. Hudson had beenseen lurking about, and it was believed by the police that he haddone away with Beddoes and had fled. For myself I believe that thetruth was exactly the opposite. I think that it is most probable thatBeddoes, pushed to desperation and believing himself to have beenalready betrayed, had revenged himself upon Hudson, and had fled fromthe country with as much money as he could lay his hands on. Thoseare the facts of the case, Doctor, and if they are of any use to yourcollection, I am sure that they are very heartily at your service."





                          THE MUSGRAVE RITUAL
An anomaly which often struck me in the character of my friendSherlock Holmes was that, although in his methods of thought he wasthe neatest and most methodical of mankind, and although also heaffected a certain quiet primness of dress, he was none the less inhis personal habits one of the most untidy men that ever drove afellow-lodger to distraction. Not that I am in the least conventionalin that respect myself. The rough-and-tumble work in Afghanistan,coming on the top of a natural Bohemianism of disposition, has mademe rather more lax than befits a medical man. But with me there is alimit, and when I find a man who keeps his cigars in thecoal-scuttle, his tobacco in the toe end of a Persian slipper, andhis unanswered correspondence transfixed by a jack-knife into thevery centre of his wooden mantelpiece, then I begin to give myselfvirtuous airs. I have always held, too, that pistol practice shouldbe distinctly an open-air pastime; and when Holmes, in one of hisqueer humors, would sit in an arm-chair with his hair-trigger and ahundred Boxer cartridges, and proceed to adorn the opposite wall witha patriotic V. R. done in bullet-pocks, I felt strongly that neitherthe atmosphere nor the appearance of our room was improved by it.
Our chambers were always full of chemicals and of criminal relicswhich had a way of wandering into unlikely positions, and of turningup in the butter-dish or in even less desirable places. But hispapers were my great crux. He had a horror of destroying documents,especially those which were connected with his past cases, and yet itwas only once in every year or two that he would muster energy todocket and arrange them; for, as I have mentioned somewhere in theseincoherent memoirs, the outbursts of passionate energy when heperformed the remarkable feats with which his name is associated werefollowed by reactions of lethargy during which he would lie aboutwith his violin and his books, hardly moving save from the sofa tothe table. Thus month after month his papers accumulated, until everycorner of the room was stacked with bundles of manuscript which wereon no account to be burned, and which could not be put away save bytheir owner. One winter's night, as we sat together by the fire, Iventured to suggest to him that, as he had finished pasting extractsinto his common-place book, he might employ the next two hours inmaking our room a little more habitable. He could not deny thejustice of my request, so with a rather rueful face he went off tohis bedroom, from which he returned presently pulling a large tin boxbehind him. This he placed in the middle of the floor and, squattingdown upon a stool in front of it, he threw back the lid. I could seethat it was already a third full of bundles of paper tied up with redtape into separate packages.
"There are cases enough here, Watson," said he, looking at me withmischievous eyes. "I think that if you knew all that I had in thisbox you would ask me to pull some out instead of putting others in."
"These are the records of your early work, then?" I asked. "I haveoften wished that I had notes of those cases."
"Yes, my boy, these were all done prematurely before my biographerhad come to glorify me." He lifted bundle after bundle in a tender,caressing sort of way. "They are not all successes, Watson," said he."But there are some pretty little problems among them. Here's therecord of the Tarleton murders, and the case of Vamberry, the winemerchant, and the adventure of the old Russian woman, and thesingular affair of the aluminium crutch, as well as a full account ofRicoletti of the club-foot, and his abominable wife. And here--ah,now, this really is something a little recherch."
He dived his arm down to the bottom of the chest, and brought up asmall wooden box with a sliding lid, such as children's toys are keptin. From within he produced a crumpled piece of paper, anold-fashioned brass key, a peg of wood with a ball of string attachedto it, and three rusty old disks of metal.
"Well, my boy, what do you make of this lot?" he asked, smiling at myexpression.
"It is a curious collection."
"Very curious, and the story that hangs round it will strike you asbeing more curious still."
"These relics have a history then?"
"So much so that they are history."
"What do you mean by that?"
Sherlock Holmes picked them up one by one, and laid them along theedge of the table. Then he reseated himself in his chair and lookedthem over with a gleam of satisfaction in his eyes.
"These," said he, "are all that I have left to remind me of theadventure of the Musgrave Ritual."
I had heard him mention the case more than once, though I had neverbeen able to gather the details. "I should be so glad," said I, "ifyou would give me an account of it."
"And leave the litter as it is?" he cried, mischievously. "Yourtidiness won't bear much strain after all, Watson. But I should beglad that you should add this case to your annals, for there arepoints in it which make it quite unique in the criminal records ofthis or, I believe, of any other country. A collection of my triflingachievements would certainly be incomplete which contained no accountof this very singular business.
"You may remember how the affair of the Gloria Scott, and myconversation with the unhappy man whose fate I told you of, firstturned my attention in the direction of the profession which hasbecome my life's work. You see me now when my name has become knownfar and wide, and when I am generally recognized both by the publicand by the official force as being a final court of appeal indoubtful cases. Even when you knew me first, at the time of theaffair which you have commemorated in 'A Study in Scarlet,' I hadalready established a considerable, though not a very lucrative,connection. You can hardly realize, then, how difficult I found it atfirst, and how long I had to wait before I succeeded in making anyheadway.
"When I first came up to London I had rooms in Montague Street, justround the corner from the British Museum, and there I waited, fillingin my too abundant leisure time by studying all those branches ofscience which might make me more efficient. Now and again cases camein my way, principally through the introduction of oldfellow-students, for during my last years at the University there wasa good deal of talk there about myself and my methods. The third ofthese cases was that of the Musgrave Ritual, and it is to theinterest which was aroused by that singular chain of events, and thelarge issues which proved to be at stake, that I trace my firststride towards the position which I now hold.
"Reginald Musgrave had been in the same college as myself, and I hadsome slight acquaintance with him. He was not generally popular amongthe undergraduates, though it always seemed to me that what was setdown as pride was really an attempt to cover extreme naturaldiffidence. In appearance he was a man of exceedingly aristocratictype, thin, high-nosed, and large-eyed, with languid and yet courtlymanners. He was indeed a scion of one of the very oldest families inthe kingdom, though his branch was a cadet one which had separatedfrom the northern Musgraves some time in the sixteenth century, andhad established itself in western Sussex, where the Manor House ofHurlstone is perhaps the oldest inhabited building in the county.Something of his birth place seemed to cling to the man, and I neverlooked at his pale, keen face or the poise of his head withoutassociating him with gray archways and mullioned windows and all thevenerable wreckage of a feudal keep. Once or twice we drifted intotalk, and I can remember that more than once he expressed a keeninterest in my methods of observation and inference.
"For four years I had seen nothing of him until one morning he walkedinto my room in Montague Street. He had changed little, was dressedlike a young man of fashion--he was always a bit of a dandy--andpreserved the same quiet, suave manner which had formerlydistinguished him.
"'How has all gone with you Musgrave?' I asked, after we hadcordially shaken hands.
"'You probably heard of my poor father's death,' said he; 'he wascarried off about two years ago. Since then I have of course had theHurlstone estates to manage, and as I am member for my district aswell, my life has been a busy one. But I understand, Holmes, that youare turning to practical ends those powers with which you used toamaze us?'
"'Yes,' said I, 'I have taken to living by my wits.'
"'I am delighted to hear it, for your advice at present would beexceedingly valuable to me. We have had some very strange doings atHurlstone, and the police have been able to throw no light upon thematter. It is really the most extraordinary and inexplicablebusiness.'
"You can imagine with what eagerness I listened to him, Watson, forthe very chance for which I had been panting during all those monthsof inaction seemed to have come within my reach. In my inmost heart Ibelieved that I could succeed where others failed, and now I had theopportunity to test myself.
"'Pray, let me have the details,' I cried.
"Reginald Musgrave sat down opposite to me, and lit the cigarettewhich I had pushed towards him.
"'You must know,' said he, 'that though I am a bachelor, I have tokeep up a considerable staff of servants at Hurlstone, for it is arambling old place, and takes a good deal of looking after. Ipreserve, too, and in the pheasant months I usually have ahouse-party, so that it would not do to be short-handed. Altogetherthere are eight maids, the cook, the butler, two footmen, and a boy.The garden and the stables of course have a separate staff.
"'Of these servants the one who had been longest in our service wasBrunton the butler. He was a young school-master out of place when hewas first taken up by my father, but he was a man of great energy andcharacter, and he soon became quite invaluable in the household. Hewas a well-grown, handsome man, with a splendid forehead, and thoughhe has been with us for twenty years he cannot be more than fortynow. With his personal advantages and his extraordinary gifts--for hecan speak several languages and play nearly every musicalinstrument--it is wonderful that he should have been satisfied solong in such a position, but I suppose that he was comfortable, andlacked energy to make any change. The butler of Hurlstone is always athing that is remembered by all who visit us.
"'But this paragon has one fault. He is a bit of a Don Juan, and youcan imagine that for a man like him it is not a very difficult partto play in a quiet country district. When he was married it was allright, but since he has been a widower we have had no end of troublewith him. A few months ago we were in hopes that he was about tosettle down again for he became engaged to Rachel Howells, our secondhouse-maid; but he has thrown her over since then and taken up withJanet Tregellis, the daughter of the head game-keeper. Rachel--who isa very good girl, but of an excitable Welsh temperament--had a sharptouch of brain-fever, and goes about the house now--or did untilyesterday--like a black-eyed shadow of her former self. That was ourfirst drama at Hurlstone; but a second one came to drive it from ourminds, and it was prefaced by the disgrace and dismissal of butlerBrunton.
"'This was how it came about. I have said that the man wasintelligent, and this very intelligence has caused his ruin, for itseems to have led to an insatiable curiosity about things which didnot in the least concern him. I had no idea of the lengths to whichthis would carry him, until the merest accident opened my eyes to it.
"'I have said that the house is a rambling one. One day last week--onThursday night, to be more exact--I found that I could not sleep,having foolishly taken a cup of strong caf noir after my dinner.After struggling against it until two in the morning, I felt that itwas quite hopeless, so I rose and lit the candle with the intentionof continuing a novel which I was reading. The book, however, hadbeen left in the billiard-room, so I pulled on my dressing-gown andstarted off to get it.
"'In order to reach the billiard-room I had to descend a flight ofstairs and then to cross the head of a passage which led to thelibrary and the gun-room. You can imagine my surprise when, as Ilooked down this corridor, I saw a glimmer of light coming from theopen door of the library. I had myself extinguished the lamp andclosed the door before coming to bed. Naturally my first thought wasof burglars. The corridors at Hurlstone have their walls largelydecorated with trophies of old weapons. From one of these I picked abattle-axe, and then, leaving my candle behind me, I crept on tiptoedown the passage and peeped in at the open door.
"'Brunton, the butler, was in the library. He was sitting, fullydressed, in an easy-chair, with a slip of paper which looked like amap upon his knee, and his forehead sunk forward upon his hand indeep thought. I stood dumb with astonishment, watching him from thedarkness. A small taper on the edge of the table shed a feeble lightwhich sufficed to show me that he was fully dressed. Suddenly, as Ilooked, he rose from his chair, and walking over to a bureau at theside, he unlocked it and drew out one of the drawers. From this hetook a paper, and returning to his seat he flattened it out besidethe taper on the edge of the table, and began to study it with minuteattention. My indignation at this calm examination of our familydocuments overcame me so far that I took a step forward, and Brunton,looking up, saw me standing in the doorway. He sprang to his feet,his face turned livid with fear, and he thrust into his breast thechart-like paper which he had been originally studying.
"'"So!" said I. "This is how you repay the trust which we havereposed in you. You will leave my service to-morrow."
"'He bowed with the look of a man who is utterly crushed, and slunkpast me without a word. The taper was still on the table, and by itslight I glanced to see what the paper was which Brunton had takenfrom the bureau. To my surprise it was nothing of any importance atall, but simply a copy of the questions and answers in the singularold observance called the Musgrave Ritual. It is a sort of ceremonypeculiar to our family, which each Musgrave for centuries past hasgone through on his coming of age--a thing of private interest, andperhaps of some little importance to the archaeologist, like our ownblazonings and charges, but of no practical use whatever.'
"'We had better come back to the paper afterwards,' said I.
"'If you think it really necessary,' he answered, with somehesitation. 'To continue my statement, however: I relocked thebureau, using the key which Brunton had left, and I had turned to gowhen I was surprised to find that the butler had returned, and wasstanding before me.
"'"Mr. Musgrave, sir," he cried, in a voice which was hoarse withemotion, "I can't bear disgrace, sir. I've always been proud above mystation in life, and disgrace would kill me. My blood will be on yourhead, sir--it will, indeed--if you drive me to despair. If you cannotkeep me after what has passed, then for God's sake let me give younotice and leave in a month, as if of my own free will. I could standthat, Mr. Musgrave, but not to be cast out before all the folk that Iknow so well."
"'"You don't deserve much consideration, Brunton," I answered. "Yourconduct has been most infamous. However, as you have been a long timein the family, I have no wish to bring public disgrace upon you. Amonth, however is too long. Take yourself away in a week, and givewhat reason you like for going."
"'"Only a week, sir?" he cried, in a despairing voice. "Afortnight--say at least a fortnight!"
"'"A week," I repeated, "and you may consider yourself to have beenvery leniently dealt with."
"'He crept away, his face sunk upon his breast, like a broken man,while I put out the light and returned to my room.
"'For two days after this Brunton was most assiduous in his attentionto his duties. I made no allusion to what had passed, and waited withsome curiosity to see how he would cover his disgrace. On the thirdmorning, however he did not appear, as was his custom, afterbreakfast to receive my instructions for the day. As I left thedining-room I happened to meet Rachel Howells, the maid. I have toldyou that she had only recently recovered from an illness, and waslooking so wretchedly pale and wan that I remonstrated with her forbeing at work.
"'"You should be in bed," I said. "Come back to your duties when youare stronger."
"'She looked at me with so strange an expression that I began tosuspect that her brain was affected.
"'"I am strong enough, Mr. Musgrave," said she.
"'"We will see what the doctor says," I answered. "You must stop worknow, and when you go downstairs just say that I wish to see Brunton."
"'"The butler is gone," said she.
"'"Gone! Gone where?"
"'"He is gone. No one has seen him. He is not in his room. Oh, yes,he is gone, he is gone!" She fell back against the wall with shriekafter shriek of laughter, while I, horrified at this suddenhysterical attack, rushed to the bell to summon help. The girl wastaken to her room, still screaming and sobbing, while I madeinquiries about Brunton. There was no doubt about it that he haddisappeared. His bed had not been slept in, he had been seen by noone since he had retired to his room the night before, and yet it wasdifficult to see how he could have left the house, as both windowsand doors were found to be fastened in the morning. His clothes, hiswatch, and even his money were in his room, but the black suit whichhe usually wore was missing. His slippers, too, were gone, but hisboots were left behind. Where then could butler Brunton have gone inthe night, and what could have become of him now?
"'Of course we searched the house from cellar to garret, but therewas no trace of him. It is, as I have said, a labyrinth of an oldhouse, especially the original wing, which is now practicallyuninhabited; but we ransacked every room and cellar withoutdiscovering the least sign of the missing man. It was incredible tome that he could have gone away leaving all his property behind him,and yet where could he be? I called in the local police, but withoutsuccess. Rain had fallen on the night before and we examined the lawnand the paths all round the house, but in vain. Matters were in thisstate, when a new development quite drew our attention away from theoriginal mystery.
"'For two days Rachel Howells had been so ill, sometimes delirious,sometimes hysterical, that a nurse had been employed to sit up withher at night. On the third night after Brunton's disappearance, thenurse, finding her patient sleeping nicely, had dropped into a nap inthe arm-chair, when she woke in the early morning to find the bedempty, the window open, and no signs of the invalid. I was instantlyaroused, and, with the two footmen, started off at once in search ofthe missing girl. It was not difficult to tell the direction whichshe had taken, for, starting from under her window, we could followher footmarks easily across the lawn to the edge of the mere, wherethey vanished close to the gravel path which leads out of thegrounds. The lake there is eight feet deep, and you can imagine ourfeelings when we saw that the trail of the poor demented girl came toan end at the edge of it.
"'Of course, we had the drags at once, and set to work to recover theremains, but no trace of the body could we find. On the other hand,we brought to the surface an object of a most unexpected kind. It wasa linen bag which contained within it a mass of old rusted anddiscolored metal and several dull-colored pieces of pebble or glass.This strange find was all that we could get from the mere, and,although we made every possible search and inquiry yesterday, we knownothing of the fate either of Rachel Howells or of Richard Brunton.The county police are at their wits' end, and I have come up to youas a last resource.'
"You can imagine, Watson, with what eagerness I listened to thisextraordinary sequence of events, and endeavored to piece themtogether, and to devise some common thread upon which they might allhang. The butler was gone. The maid was gone. The maid had loved thebutler, but had afterwards had cause to hate him. She was of Welshblood, fiery and passionate. She had been terribly excitedimmediately after his disappearance. She had flung into the lake abag containing some curious contents. These were all factors whichhad to be taken into consideration, and yet none of them got quite tothe heart of the matter. What was the starting-point of this chain ofevents? There lay the end of this tangled line.
"'I must see that paper, Musgrave,' said I, 'which this butler ofyour thought it worth his while to consult, even at the risk of theloss of his place.'
"'It is rather an absurd business, this ritual of ours,' he answered.'But it has at least the saving grace of antiquity to excuse it. Ihave a copy of the questions and answers here if you care to run youreye over them.'
"He handed me the very paper which I have here, Watson, and this isthe strange catechism to which each Musgrave had to submit when hecame to man's estate. I will read you the questions and answers asthey stand.
"'Whose was it?'
"'His who is gone.'
"'Who shall have it?'
"'He who will come.'
"'What was the month?'
"'The sixth from the first.'
"'Where was the sun?'
"'Over the oak.'
"'Where was the shadow?'
"'Under the elm.'
"'How was it stepped?'
"'North by ten and by ten, east by five and by five, south by two andby two, west by one and by one, and so under.'
"'What shall we give for it?'
"'All that is ours.'
"'Why should we give it?'
"'For the sake of the trust.'
"'The original has no date, but is in the spelling of the middle ofthe seventeenth century,' remarked Musgrave. 'I am afraid, however,that it can be of little help to you in solving this mystery.'
"'At least,' said I, 'it gives us another mystery, and one which iseven more interesting than the first. It may be that the solution ofthe one may prove to be the solution of the other. You will excuseme, Musgrave, if I say that your butler appears to me to have been avery clever man, and to have had a clearer insight that tengenerations of his masters.'
"'I hardly follow you,' said Musgrave. 'The paper seems to me to beof no practical importance.'
"'But to me it seems immensely practical, and I fancy that Bruntontook the same view. He had probably seen it before that night onwhich you caught him.'
"'It is very possible. We took no pains to hide it.'
"'He simply wished, I should imagine, to refresh his memory upon thatlast occasion. He had, as I understand, some sort of map or chartwhich he was comparing with the manuscript, and which he thrust intohis pocket when you appeared.'
"'That is true. But what could he have to do with this old familycustom of ours, and what does this rigmarole mean?'
"'I don't think that we should have much difficulty in determiningthat,' said I; 'with your permission we will take the first traindown to Sussex, and go a little more deeply into the matter upon thespot.'
"The same afternoon saw us both at Hurlstone. Possibly you have seenpictures and read descriptions of the famous old building, so I willconfine my account of it to saying that it is built in the shape ofan L, the long arm being the more modern portion, and the shorter theancient nucleus, from which the other had developed. Over the low,heavily-lintelled door, in the centre of this old part, is chiseledthe date, 1607, but experts are agreed that the beams and stone-workare really much older than this. The enormously thick walls and tinywindows of this part had in the last century driven the family intobuilding the new wing, and the old one was used now as a store-houseand a cellar, when it was used at all. A splendid park with fine oldtimber surrounds the house, and the lake, to which my client hadreferred, lay close to the avenue, about two hundred yards from thebuilding.
"I was already firmly convinced, Watson, that there were not threeseparate mysteries here, but one only, and that if I could read theMusgrave Ritual aright I should hold in my hand the clue which wouldlead me to the truth concerning both the butler Brunton and the maidHowells. To that then I turned all my energies. Why should thisservant be so anxious to master this old formula? Evidently becausehe saw something in it which had escaped all those generations ofcountry squires, and from which he expected some personal advantage.What was it then, and how had it affected his fate?
"It was perfectly obvious to me, on reading the ritual, that themeasurements must refer to some spot to which the rest of thedocument alluded, and that if we could find that spot, we should bein a fair way towards finding what the secret was which the oldMusgraves had thought it necessary to embalm in so curious a fashion.There were two guides given us to start with, an oak and an elm. Asto the oak there could be no question at all. Right in front of thehouse, upon the left-hand side of the drive, there stood a patriarchamong oaks, one of the most magnificent trees that I have ever seen.
"'That was there when your ritual was drawn up,' said I, as we drovepast it.
"'It was there at the Norman Conquest in all probability,' heanswered. 'It has a girth of twenty-three feet.'
"Here was one of my fixed points secured.
"'Have you any old elms?' I asked.
"'There used to be a very old one over yonder but it was struck bylightning ten years ago, and we cut down the stump,'
"'You can see where it used to be?'
"'Oh, yes.'
"'There are no other elms?'
"'No old ones, but plenty of beeches.'
"'I should like to see where it grew.'
"We had driven up in a dogcart, and my client led me away at once,without our entering the house, to the scar on the lawn where the elmhad stood. It was nearly midway between the oak and the house. Myinvestigation seemed to be progressing.
"'I suppose it is impossible to find out how high the elm was?' Iasked.
"'I can give you it at once. It was sixty-four feet.'
"'How do you come to know it?' I asked, in surprise.
"'When my old tutor used to give me an exercise in trigonometry, italways took the shape of measuring heights. When I was a lad I workedout every tree and building in the estate.'
"This was an unexpected piece of luck. My data were coming morequickly than I could have reasonably hoped.
"'Tell me,' I asked, 'did your butler ever ask you such a question?'
"Reginald Musgrave looked at me in astonishment. 'Now that you callit to my mind,' he answered, 'Brunton did ask me about the height ofthe tree some months ago, in connection with some little argumentwith the groom.'
"This was excellent news, Watson, for it showed me that I was on theright road. I looked up at the sun. It was low in the heavens, and Icalculated that in less than an hour it would lie just above thetopmost branches of the old oak. One condition mentioned in theRitual would then be fulfilled. And the shadow of the elm must meanthe farther end of the shadow, otherwise the trunk would have beenchosen as the guide. I had, then, to find where the far end of theshadow would fall when the sun was just clear of the oak."
"That must have been difficult, Holmes, when the elm was no longerthere."
"Well, at least I knew that if Brunton could do it, I could also.Besides, there was no real difficulty. I went with Musgrave to hisstudy and whittled myself this peg, to which I tied this long stringwith a knot at each yard. Then I took two lengths of a fishing-rod,which came to just six feet, and I went back with my client to wherethe elm had been. The sun was just grazing the top of the oak. Ifastened the rod on end, marked out the direction of the shadow, andmeasured it. It was nine feet in length.
"Of course the calculation now was a simple one. If a rod of six feetthrew a shadow of nine, a tree of sixty-four feet would throw one ofninety-six, and the line of the one would of course be the line ofthe other. I measured out the distance, which brought me almost tothe wall of the house, and I thrust a peg into the spot. You canimagine my exultation, Watson, when within two inches of my peg I sawa conical depression in the ground. I knew that it was the mark madeby Brunton in his measurements, and that I was still upon his trail.
"From this starting-point I proceeded to step, having first taken thecardinal points by my pocket-compass. Ten steps with each foot tookme along parallel with the wall of the house, and again I marked myspot with a peg. Then I carefully paced off five to the east and twoto the south. It brought me to the very threshold of the old door.Two steps to the west meant now that I was to go two paces down thestone-flagged passage, and this was the place indicated by theRitual.
"Never have I felt such a cold chill of disappointment, Watson. For amoment it seemed to me that there must be some radical mistake in mycalculations. The setting sun shone full upon the passage floor, andI could see that the old, foot-worn gray stones with which it waspaved were firmly cemented together, and had certainly not been movedfor many a long year. Brunton had not been at work here. I tappedupon the floor, but it sounded the same all over, and there was nosign of any crack or crevice. But fortunately, Musgrave, who hadbegun to appreciate the meaning of my proceedings, and who was now asexcited as myself, took out his manuscript to check my calculation.
"'And under,' he cried. 'You have omitted the "and under."'
"I had thought that it meant that we were to dig, but now, of course,I saw at once that I was wrong. 'There is a cellar under this then?'I cried.
"'Yes, and as old as the house. Down here, through this door.'
"We went down a winding stone stair, and my companion, striking amatch, lit a large lantern which stood on a barrel in the corner. Inan instant it was obvious that we had at last come upon the trueplace, and that we had not been the only people to visit the spotrecently.
"It had been used for the storage of wood, but the billets, which hadevidently been littered over the floor, were now piled at the sides,so as to leave a clear space in the middle. In this space lay a largeand heavy flagstone with a rusted iron ring in the centre to which athick shepherd's-check muffler was attached.
"'By Jove!' cried my client. 'That's Brunton's muffler. I have seenit on him, and could swear to it. What has the villain been doinghere?'
"At my suggestion a couple of the county police were summoned to bepresent, and I then endeavored to raise the stone by pulling on thecravat. I could only move it slightly, and it was with the aid of oneof the constables that I succeeded at last in carrying it to oneside. A black hole yawned beneath into which we all peered, whileMusgrave, kneeling at the side, pushed down the lantern.
"A small chamber about seven feet deep and four feet square lay opento us. At one side of this was a squat, brass-bound wooden box, thelid of which was hinged upwards, with this curious old-fashioned keyprojecting from the lock. It was furred outside by a thick layer ofdust, and damp and worms had eaten through the wood, so that a cropof livid fungi was growing on the inside of it. Several discs ofmetal, old coins apparently, such as I hold here, were scattered overthe bottom of the box, but it contained nothing else.
"At the moment, however, we had no thought for the old chest, for oureyes were riveted upon that which crouched beside it. It was thefigure of a man, clad in a suit of black, who squatted down upon hishams with his forehead sunk upon the edge of the box and his two armsthrown out on each side of it. The attitude had drawn all thestagnant blood to the face, and no man could have recognized thatdistorted liver-colored countenance; but his height, his dress, andhis hair were all sufficient to show my client, when we had drawn thebody up, that it was indeed his missing butler. He had been dead somedays, but there was no wound or bruise upon his person to show how hehad met his dreadful end. When his body had been carried from thecellar we found ourselves still confronted with a problem which wasalmost as formidable as that with which we had started.
"I confess that so far, Watson, I had been disappointed in myinvestigation. I had reckoned upon solving the matter when once I hadfound the place referred to in the Ritual; but now I was there, andwas apparently as far as ever from knowing what it was which thefamily had concealed with such elaborate precautions. It is true thatI had thrown a light upon the fate of Brunton, but now I had toascertain how that fate had come upon him, and what part had beenplayed in the matter by the woman who had disappeared. I sat downupon a keg in the corner and thought the whole matter carefully over.
"You know my methods in such cases, Watson. I put myself in the man'splace and, having first gauged his intelligence, I try to imagine howI should myself have proceeded under the same circumstances. In thiscase the matter was simplified by Brunton's intelligence being quitefirst-rate, so that it was unnecessary to make any allowance for thepersonal equation, as the astronomers have dubbed it. He knew thatsomething valuable was concealed. He had spotted the place. He foundthat the stone which covered it was just too heavy for a man to moveunaided. What would he do next? He could not get help from outside,even if he had some one whom he could trust, without the unbarring ofdoors and considerable risk of detection. It was better, if he could,to have his helpmate inside the house. But whom could he ask? Thisgirl had been devoted to him. A man always finds it hard to realizethat he may have finally lost a woman's love, however badly he mayhave treated her. He would try by a few attentions to make his peacewith the girl Howells, and then would engage her as his accomplice.Together they would come at night to the cellar, and their unitedforce would suffice to raise the stone. So far I could follow theiractions as if I had actually seen them.
"But for two of them, and one a woman, it must have been heavy workthe raising of that stone. A burly Sussex policeman and I had foundit no light job. What would they do to assist them? Probably what Ishould have done myself. I rose and examined carefully the differentbillets of wood which were scattered round the floor. Almost at onceI came upon what I expected. One piece, about three feet in length,had a very marked indentation at one end, while several wereflattened at the sides as if they had been compressed by someconsiderable weight. Evidently, as they had dragged the stone up theyhad thrust the chunks of wood into the chink, until at last, when theopening was large enough to crawl through, they would hold it open bya billet placed lengthwise, which might very well become indented atthe lower end, since the whole weight of the stone would press itdown on to the edge of this other slab. So far I was still on safeground.
"And now how was I to proceed to reconstruct this midnight drama?Clearly, only one could fit into the hole, and that one was Brunton.The girl must have waited above. Brunton then unlocked the box,handed up the contents presumably--since they were not to befound--and then--and then what happened?
"What smouldering fire of vengeance had suddenly sprung into flame inthis passionate Celtic woman's soul when she saw the man who hadwronged her--wronged her, perhaps, far more than we suspected--in herpower? Was it a chance that the wood had slipped, and that the stonehad shut Brunton into what had become his sepulchre? Had she onlybeen guilty of silence as to his fate? Or had some sudden blow fromher hand dashed the support away and sent the slab crashing down intoits place? Be that as it might, I seemed to see that woman's figurestill clutching at her treasure trove and flying wildly up thewinding stair, with her ears ringing perhaps with the muffled screamsfrom behind her and with the drumming of frenzied hands against theslab of stone which was choking her faithless lover's life out.
"Here was the secret of her blanched face, her shaken nerves, herpeals of hysterical laughter on the next morning. But what had beenin the box? What had she done with that? Of course, it must have beenthe old metal and pebbles which my client had dragged from the mere.She had thrown them in there at the first opportunity to remove thelast trace of her crime.
"For twenty minutes I had sat motionless, thinking the matter out.Musgrave still stood with a very pale face, swinging his lantern andpeering down into the hole.
"'These are coins of Charles the First,' said he, holding out the fewwhich had been in the box; 'you see we were right in fixing our datefor the Ritual.'
"'We may find something else of Charles the First,' I cried, as theprobable meaning of the first two question of the Ritual brokesuddenly upon me. 'Let me see the contents of the bag which youfished from the mere.'
"We ascended to his study, and he laid the debris before me. I couldunderstand his regarding it as of small importance when I looked atit, for the metal was almost black and the stones lustreless anddull. I rubbed one of them on my sleeve, however, and it glowedafterwards like a spark in the dark hollow of my hand. The metal workwas in the form of a double ring, but it had been bent and twistedout of its original shape.
"'You must bear in mind,' said I, 'that the royal party made head inEngland even after the death of the King, and that when they at lastfled they probably left many of their most precious possessionsburied behind them, with the intention of returning for them in morepeaceful times.'
"'My ancestor, Sir Ralph Musgrave, was a prominent Cavalier and theright-hand man of Charles the Second in his wanderings,' said myfriend.
"'Ah, indeed!' I answered. 'Well now, I think that really should giveus the last link that we wanted. I must congratulate you on cominginto the possession, though in rather a tragic manner, of a relicwhich is of great intrinsic value, but of even greater importance asan historical curiosity.'
"'What is it, then?' he gasped in astonishment.
"'It is nothing less than the ancient crown of the kings of England.'
"'The crown!'
"'Precisely. Consider what the Ritual says: How does it run? "Whosewas it?" "His who is gone." That was after the execution of Charles.Then, "Who shall have it?" "He who will come." That was Charles theSecond, whose advent was already foreseen. There can, I think, be nodoubt that this battered and shapeless diadem once encircled thebrows of the royal Stuarts.'
"'And how came it in the pond?'
"'Ah, that is a question that will take some time to answer.' Andwith that I sketched out to him the whole long chain of surmise andof proof which I had constructed. The twilight had closed in and themoon was shining brightly in the sky before my narrative wasfinished.
"'And how was it then that Charles did not get his crown when hereturned?' asked Musgrave, pushing back the relic into its linen bag.
"'Ah, there you lay your finger upon the one point which we shallprobably never be able to clear up. It is likely that the Musgravewho held the secret died in the interval, and by some oversight leftthis guide to his descendant without explaining the meaning of it.From that day to this it has been handed down from father to son,until at last it came within reach of a man who tore its secret outof it and lost his life in the venture.'
"And that's the story of the Musgrave Ritual, Watson. They have thecrown down at Hurlstone--though they had some legal bother and aconsiderable sum to pay before they were allowed to retain it. I amsure that if you mentioned my name they would be happy to show it toyou. Of the woman nothing was ever heard, and the probability is thatshe got away out of England and carried herself and the memory of hercrime to some land beyond the seas."





                          THE REIGATE SQUIRES
It was some time before the health of my friend Mr. Sherlock Holmesrecovered from the strain caused by his immense exertions in thespring of '87. The whole question of the Netherland-Sumatra Companyand of the colossal schemes of Baron Maupertuis are too recent in theminds of the public, and are too intimately concerned with politicsand finance to be fitting subjects for this series of sketches. Theyled, however, in an indirect fashion to a singular and complexproblem which gave my friend an opportunity of demonstrating thevalue of a fresh weapon among the many with which he waged hislife-long battle against crime.
On referring to my notes I see that it was upon the 14th of Aprilthat I received a telegram from Lyons which informed me that Holmeswas lying ill in the Hotel Dulong. Within twenty-four hours I was inhis sick-room, and was relieved to find that there was nothingformidable in his symptoms. Even his iron constitution, however, hadbroken down under the strain of an investigation which had extendedover two months, during which period he had never worked less thanfifteen hours a day, and had more than once, as he assured me, keptto his task for five days at a stretch. Even the triumphant issue ofhis labors could not save him from reaction after so terrible anexertion, and at a time when Europe was ringing with his name andwhen his room was literally ankle-deep with congratulatory telegramsI found him a prey to the blackest depression. Even the knowledgethat he had succeeded where the police of three countries had failed,and that he had outmanoeuvred at every point the most accomplishedswindler in Europe, was insufficient to rouse him from his nervousprostration.
Three days later we were back in Baker Street together; but it wasevident that my friend would be much the better for a change, and thethought of a week of spring time in the country was full ofattractions to me also. My old friend, Colonel Hayter, who had comeunder my professional care in Afghanistan, had now taken a house nearReigate in Surrey, and had frequently asked me to come down to himupon a visit. On the last occasion he had remarked that if my friendwould only come with me he would be glad to extend his hospitality tohim also. A little diplomacy was needed, but when Holmes understoodthat the establishment was a bachelor one, and that he would beallowed the fullest freedom, he fell in with my plans and a weekafter our return from Lyons we were under the Colonel's roof. Hayterwas a fine old soldier who had seen much of the world, and he soonfound, as I had expected, that Holmes and he had much in common.
On the evening of our arrival we were sitting in the Colonel'sgun-room after dinner, Holmes stretched upon the sofa, while Hayterand I looked over his little armory of Eastern weapons.
"By the way," said he suddenly, "I think I'll take one of thesepistols upstairs with me in case we have an alarm."
"An alarm!" said I.
"Yes, we've had a scare in this part lately. Old Acton, who is one ofour county magnates, had his house broken into last Monday. No greatdamage done, but the fellows are still at large."
"No clue?" asked Holmes, cocking his eye at the Colonel.
"None as yet. But the affair is a pretty one, one of our littlecountry crimes, which must seem too small for your attention, Mr.Holmes, after this great international affair."
Holmes waved away the compliment, though his smile showed that it hadpleased him.
"Was there any feature of interest?"
"I fancy not. The thieves ransacked the library and got very littlefor their pains. The whole place was turned upside down, drawersburst open, and presses ransacked, with the result that an odd volumeof Pope's Homer, two plated candlesticks, an ivory letter-weight, asmall oak barometer, and a ball of twine are all that have vanished."
"What an extraordinary assortment!" I exclaimed.
"Oh, the fellows evidently grabbed hold of everything they couldget."
Holmes grunted from the sofa.
"The county police ought to make something of that," said he; "why,it is surely obvious that--"
But I held up a warning finger.
"You are here for a rest, my dear fellow. For Heaven's sake don't getstarted on a new problem when your nerves are all in shreds."
Holmes shrugged his shoulders with a glance of comic resignationtowards the Colonel, and the talk drifted away into less dangerouschannels.
It was destined, however, that all my professional caution should bewasted, for next morning the problem obtruded itself upon us in sucha way that it was impossible to ignore it, and our country visit tooka turn which neither of us could have anticipated. We were atbreakfast when the Colonel's butler rushed in with all his proprietyshaken out of him.
"Have you heard the news, sir?" he gasped. "At the Cunningham's sir!"
"Burglary!" cried the Colonel, with his coffee-cup in mid-air.
"Murder!"
The Colonel whistled. "By Jove!" said he. "Who's killed, then? TheJ.P. or his son?"
"Neither, sir. It was William the coachman. Shot through the heart,sir, and never spoke again."
"Who shot him, then?"
"The burglar, sir. He was off like a shot and got clean away. He'djust broke in at the pantry window when William came on him and methis end in saving his master's property."
"What time?"
"It was last night, sir, somewhere about twelve."
"Ah, then, we'll step over afterwards," said the Colonel, coollysettling down to his breakfast again. "It's a baddish business," headded when the butler had gone; "he's our leading man about here, isold Cunningham, and a very decent fellow too. He'll be cut up overthis, for the man has been in his service for years and was a goodservant. It's evidently the same villains who broke into Acton's."
"And stole that very singular collection," said Holmes, thoughtfully.
"Precisely."
"Hum! It may prove the simplest matter in the world, but all the sameat first glance this is just a little curious, is it not? A gang ofburglars acting in the country might be expected to vary the scene oftheir operations, and not to crack two cribs in the same districtwithin a few days. When you spoke last night of taking precautions Iremember that it passed through my mind that this was probably thelast parish in England to which the thief or thieves would be likelyto turn their attention--which shows that I have still much tolearn."
"I fancy it's some local practitioner," said the Colonel. "In thatcase, of course, Acton's and Cunningham's are just the places hewould go for, since they are far the largest about here."
"And richest?"
"Well, they ought to be, but they've had a lawsuit for some yearswhich has sucked the blood out of both of them, I fancy. Old Actonhas some claim on half Cunningham's estate, and the lawyers have beenat it with both hands."
"If it's a local villain there should not be much difficulty inrunning him down," said Holmes with a yawn. "All right, Watson, Idon't intend to meddle."
"Inspector Forrester, sir," said the butler, throwing open the door.
The official, a smart, keen-faced young fellow, stepped into theroom. "Good-morning, Colonel," said he; "I hope I don't intrude, butwe hear that Mr. Holmes of Baker Street is here."
The Colonel waved his hand towards my friend, and the Inspectorbowed.
"We thought that perhaps you would care to step across, Mr. Holmes."
"The fates are against you, Watson," said he, laughing. "We werechatting about the matter when you came in, Inspector. Perhaps youcan let us have a few details." As he leaned back in his chair in thefamiliar attitude I knew that the case was hopeless.
"We had no clue in the Acton affair. But here we have plenty to goon, and there's no doubt it is the same party in each case. The manwas seen."
"Ah!"
"Yes, sir. But he was off like a deer after the shot that killed poorWilliam Kirwan was fired. Mr. Cunningham saw him from the bedroomwindow, and Mr. Alec Cunningham saw him from the back passage. It wasquarter to twelve when the alarm broke out. Mr. Cunningham had justgot into bed, and Mr. Alec was smoking a pipe in his dressing-gown.They both heard William the coachman calling for help, and Mr. Alecran down to see what was the matter. The back door was open, and ashe came to the foot of the stairs he saw two men wrestling togetheroutside. One of them fired a shot, the other dropped, and themurderer rushed across the garden and over the hedge. Mr. Cunningham,looking out of his bedroom, saw the fellow as he gained the road, butlost sight of him at once. Mr. Alec stopped to see if he could helpthe dying man, and so the villain got clean away. Beyond the factthat he was a middle-sized man and dressed in some dark stuff, wehave no personal clue; but we are making energetic inquiries, and ifhe is a stranger we shall soon find him out."
"What was this William doing there? Did he say anything before hedied?"
"Not a word. He lives at the lodge with his mother, and as he was avery faithful fellow we imagine that he walked up to the house withthe intention of seeing that all was right there. Of course thisActon business has put every one on their guard. The robber must havejust burst open the door--the lock has been forced--when William cameupon him."
"Did William say anything to his mother before going out?"
"She is very old and deaf, and we can get no information from her.The shock has made her half-witted, but I understand that she wasnever very bright. There is one very important circumstance, however.Look at this!"
He took a small piece of torn paper from a note-book and spread itout upon his knee.
"This was found between the finger and thumb of the dead man. Itappears to be a fragment torn from a larger sheet. You will observethat the hour mentioned upon it is the very time at which the poorfellow met his fate. You see that his murderer might have torn therest of the sheet from him or he might have taken this fragment fromthe murderer. It reads almost as though it were an appointment."
Holmes took up the scrap of paper, a facsimile of which is herereproduced.
[ Picture: Scrap showing the words: At quarter to twelve, learn what,may be ]
"Presuming that it is an appointment," continued the Inspector, "itis of course a conceivable theory that this William Kirwan--though hehad the reputation of being an honest man, may have been in leaguewith the thief. He may have met him there, may even have helped himto break in the door, and then they may have fallen out betweenthemselves."
"This writing is of extraordinary interest," said Holmes, who hadbeen examining it with intense concentration. "These are much deeperwaters than I had thought." He sank his head upon his hands, whilethe Inspector smiled at the effect which his case had had upon thefamous London specialist.
"Your last remark," said Holmes, presently, "as to the possibility ofthere being an understanding between the burglar and the servant, andthis being a note of appointment from one to the other, is aningenious and not entirely impossible supposition. But this writingopens up--" He sank his head into his hands again and remained forsome minutes in the deepest thought. When he raised his face again, Iwas surprised to see that his cheek was tinged with color, and hiseyes as bright as before his illness. He sprang to his feet with allhis old energy.
"I'll tell you what," said he, "I should like to have a quiet littleglance into the details of this case. There is something in it whichfascinates me extremely. If you will permit me, Colonel, I will leavemy friend Watson and you, and I will step round with the Inspector totest the truth of one or two little fancies of mine. I will be withyou again in half an hour."
An hour and half had elapsed before the Inspector returned alone.
"Mr. Holmes is walking up and down in the field outside," said he."He wants us all four to go up to the house together."
"To Mr. Cunningham's?"
"Yes, sir."
"What for?"
The Inspector shrugged his shoulders. "I don't quite know, sir.Between ourselves, I think Mr. Holmes had not quite got over hisillness yet. He's been behaving very queerly, and he is very muchexcited."
"I don't think you need alarm yourself," said I. "I have usuallyfound that there was method in his madness."
"Some folks might say there was madness in his method," muttered theInspector. "But he's all on fire to start, Colonel, so we had best goout if you are ready."
We found Holmes pacing up and down in the field, his chin sunk uponhis breast, and his hands thrust into his trousers pockets.
"The matter grows in interest," said he. "Watson, your country-triphas been a distinct success. I have had a charming morning."
"You have been up to the scene of the crime, I understand," said theColonel.
"Yes; the Inspector and I have made quite a little reconnaissancetogether."
"Any success?"
"Well, we have seen some very interesting things. I'll tell you whatwe did as we walk. First of all, we saw the body of this unfortunateman. He certainly died from a revolver wound as reported."
"Had you doubted it, then?"
"Oh, it is as well to test everything. Our inspection was not wasted.We then had an interview with Mr. Cunningham and his son, who wereable to point out the exact spot where the murderer had brokenthrough the garden-hedge in his flight. That was of great interest."
"Naturally."
"Then we had a look at this poor fellow's mother. We could get noinformation from her, however, as she is very old and feeble."
"And what is the result of your investigations?"
"The conviction that the crime is a very peculiar one. Perhaps ourvisit now may do something to make it less obscure. I think that weare both agreed, Inspector, that the fragment of paper in the deadman's hand, bearing, as it does, the very hour of his death writtenupon it, is of extreme importance."
"It should give a clue, Mr. Holmes."
"It does give a clue. Whoever wrote that note was the man who broughtWilliam Kirwan out of his bed at that hour. But where is the rest ofthat sheet of paper?"
"I examined the ground carefully in the hope of finding it," said theInspector.
"It was torn out of the dead man's hand. Why was some one so anxiousto get possession of it? Because it incriminated him. And what wouldhe do with it? Thrust it into his pocket, most likely, never noticingthat a corner of it had been left in the grip of the corpse. If wecould get the rest of that sheet it is obvious that we should havegone a long way towards solving the mystery."
"Yes, but how can we get at the criminal's pocket before we catch thecriminal?"
"Well, well, it was worth thinking over. Then there is anotherobvious point. The note was sent to William. The man who wrote itcould not have taken it; otherwise, of course, he might havedelivered his own message by word of mouth. Who brought the note,then? Or did it come through the post?"
"I have made inquiries," said the Inspector. "William received aletter by the afternoon post yesterday. The envelope was destroyed byhim."
"Excellent!" cried Holmes, clapping the Inspector on the back."You've seen the postman. It is a pleasure to work with you. Well,here is the lodge, and if you will come up, Colonel, I will show youthe scene of the crime."
We passed the pretty cottage where the murdered man had lived, andwalked up an oak-lined avenue to the fine old Queen Anne house, whichbears the date of Malplaquet upon the lintel of the door. Holmes andthe Inspector led us round it until we came to the side gate, whichis separated by a stretch of garden from the hedge which lines theroad. A constable was standing at the kitchen door.
"Throw the door open, officer," said Holmes. "Now, it was on thosestairs that young Mr. Cunningham stood and saw the two men strugglingjust where we are. Old Mr. Cunningham was at that window--the secondon the left--and he saw the fellow get away just to the left of thatbush. So did the son. They are both sure of it on account of thebush. Then Mr. Alec ran out and knelt beside the wounded man. Theground is very hard, you see, and there are no marks to guide us." Ashe spoke two men came down the garden path, from round the angle ofthe house. The one was an elderly man, with a strong, deep-lined,heavy-eyed face; the other a dashing young fellow, whose bright,smiling expression and showy dress were in strange contrast with thebusiness which had brought us there.
"Still at it, then?" said he to Holmes. "I thought you Londoners werenever at fault. You don't seem to be so very quick, after all."
"Ah, you must give us a little time," said Holmes good-humoredly.
"You'll want it," said young Alec Cunningham. "Why, I don't see thatwe have any clue at all."
"There's only one," answered the Inspector. "We thought that if wecould only find--Good heavens, Mr. Holmes! What is the matter?"
My poor friend's face had suddenly assumed the most dreadfulexpression. His eyes rolled upwards, his features writhed in agony,and with a suppressed groan he dropped on his face upon the ground.Horrified at the suddenness and severity of the attack, we carriedhim into the kitchen, where he lay back in a large chair, andbreathed heavily for some minutes. Finally, with a shamefaced apologyfor his weakness, he rose once more.
"Watson would tell you that I have only just recovered from a severeillness," he explained. "I am liable to these sudden nervousattacks."
"Shall I send you home in my trap?" asked old Cunningham.
"Well, since I am here, there is one point on which I should like tofeel sure. We can very easily verify it."
"What was it?"
"Well, it seems to me that it is just possible that the arrival ofthis poor fellow William was not before, but after, the entrance ofthe burglary into the house. You appear to take it for granted that,although the door was forced, the robber never got in."
"I fancy that is quite obvious," said Mr. Cunningham, gravely. "Why,my son Alec had not yet gone to bed, and he would certainly haveheard any one moving about."
"Where was he sitting?"
"I was smoking in my dressing-room."
"Which window is that?"
"The last on the left next my father's."
"Both of your lamps were lit, of course?"
"Undoubtedly."
"There are some very singular points here," said Holmes, smiling. "Isit not extraordinary that a burglary--and a burglar who had had someprevious experience--should deliberately break into a house at a timewhen he could see from the lights that two of the family were stillafoot?"
"He must have been a cool hand."
"Well, of course, if the case were not an odd one we should not havebeen driven to ask you for an explanation," said young Mr. Alec. "Butas to your ideas that the man had robbed the house before Williamtackled him, I think it a most absurd notion. Wouldn't we have foundthe place disarranged, and missed the things which he had taken?"
"It depends on what the things were," said Holmes. "You must rememberthat we are dealing with a burglar who is a very peculiar fellow, andwho appears to work on lines of his own. Look, for example, at thequeer lot of things which he took from Acton's--what was it?--a ballof string, a letter-weight, and I don't know what other odds andends."
"Well, we are quite in your hands, Mr. Holmes," said old Cunningham."Anything which you or the Inspector may suggest will most certainlybe done."
"In the first place," said Holmes, "I should like you to offer areward--coming from yourself, for the officials may take a littletime before they would agree upon the sum, and these things cannot bedone too promptly. I have jotted down the form here, if you would notmind signing it. Fifty pound was quite enough, I thought."
"I would willingly give five hundred," said the J.P., taking the slipof paper and the pencil which Holmes handed to him. "This is notquite correct, however," he added, glancing over the document.
"I wrote it rather hurriedly."
"You see you begin, 'Whereas, at about a quarter to one on Tuesdaymorning an attempt was made,' and so on. It was at a quarter totwelve, as a matter of fact."
I was pained at the mistake, for I knew how keenly Holmes would feelany slip of the kind. It was his specialty to be accurate as to fact,but his recent illness had shaken him, and this one little incidentwas enough to show me that he was still far from being himself. Hewas obviously embarrassed for an instant, while the Inspector raisedhis eyebrows, and Alec Cunningham burst into a laugh. The oldgentleman corrected the mistake, however, and handed the paper backto Holmes.
"Get it printed as soon as possible," he said; "I think your idea isan excellent one."
Holmes put the slip of paper carefully away into his pocket-book.
"And now," said he, "it really would be a good thing that we shouldall go over the house together and make certain that this rathererratic burglar did not, after all, carry anything away with him."
Before entering, Holmes made an examination of the door which hadbeen forced. It was evident that a chisel or strong knife had beenthrust in, and the lock forced back with it. We could see the marksin the wood where it had been pushed in.
"You don't use bars, then?" he asked.
"We have never found it necessary."
"You don't keep a dog?"
"Yes, but he is chained on the other side of the house."
"When do the servants go to bed?"
"About ten."
"I understand that William was usually in bed also at that hour."
"Yes."
"It is singular that on this particular night he should have been up.Now, I should be very glad if you would have the kindness to show usover the house, Mr. Cunningham."
A stone-flagged passage, with the kitchens branching away from it,led by a wooden staircase directly to the first floor of the house.It came out upon the landing opposite to a second more ornamentalstair which came up from the front hall. Out of this landing openedthe drawing-room and several bedrooms, including those of Mr.Cunningham and his son. Holmes walked slowly, taking keen note of thearchitecture of the house. I could tell from his expression that hewas on a hot scent, and yet I could not in the least imagine in whatdirection his inferences were leading him.
"My good sir," said Mr. Cunningham with some impatience, "this issurely very unnecessary. That is my room at the end of the stairs,and my son's is the one beyond it. I leave it to your judgmentwhether it was possible for the thief to have come up here withoutdisturbing us."
"You must try round and get on a fresh scent, I fancy," said the sonwith a rather malicious smile.
"Still, I must ask you to humor me a little further. I should like,for example, to see how far the windows of the bedrooms command thefront. This, I understand is your son's room"--he pushed open thedoor--"and that, I presume, is the dressing-room in which he satsmoking when the alarm was given. Where does the window of that lookout to?" He stepped across the bedroom, pushed open the door, andglanced round the other chamber.
"I hope that you are satisfied now?" said Mr. Cunningham, tartly.
"Thank you, I think I have seen all that I wished."
"Then if it is really necessary we can go into my room."
"If it is not too much trouble."
The J.P. shrugged his shoulders, and led the way into his ownchamber, which was a plainly furnished and commonplace room. As wemoved across it in the direction of the window, Holmes fell backuntil he and I were the last of the group. Near the foot of the bedstood a dish of oranges and a carafe of water. As we passed itHolmes, to my unutterable astonishment, leaned over in front of meand deliberately knocked the whole thing over. The glass smashed intoa thousand pieces and the fruit rolled about into every corner of theroom.
"You've done it now, Watson," said he, coolly. "A pretty mess you'vemade of the carpet."
I stooped in some confusion and began to pick up the fruit,understanding for some reason my companion desired me to take theblame upon myself. The others did the same, and set the table on itslegs again.
"Hullo!" cried the Inspector, "where's he got to?"
Holmes had disappeared.
"Wait here an instant," said young Alec Cunningham. "The fellow isoff his head, in my opinion. Come with me, father, and see where hehas got to!"
They rushed out of the room, leaving the Inspector, the Colonel, andme staring at each other.
"'Pon my word, I am inclined to agree with Master Alec," said theofficial. "It may be the effect of this illness, but it seems to methat--"
His words were cut short by a sudden scream of "Help! Help! Murder!"With a thrill I recognised the voice as that of my friend. I rushedmadly from the room on to the landing. The cries, which had sunk downinto a hoarse, inarticulate shouting, came from the room which we hadfirst visited. I dashed in, and on into the dressing-room beyond. Thetwo Cunninghams were bending over the prostrate figure of SherlockHolmes, the younger clutching his throat with both hands, while theelder seemed to be twisting one of his wrists. In an instant thethree of us had torn them away from him, and Holmes staggered to hisfeet, very pale and evidently greatly exhausted.
"Arrest these men, Inspector," he gasped.
"On what charge?"
"That of murdering their coachman, William Kirwan."
The Inspector stared about him in bewilderment. "Oh, come now, Mr.Holmes," said he at last, "I'm sure you don't really mean to--"
"Tut, man, look at their faces!" cried Holmes, curtly.
Never, certainly, have I seen a plainer confession of guilt uponhuman countenances. The older man seemed numbed and dazed with aheavy, sullen expression upon his strongly-marked face. The son, onthe other hand, had dropped all that jaunty, dashing style which hadcharacterized him, and the ferocity of a dangerous wild beast gleamedin his dark eyes and distorted his handsome features. The Inspectorsaid nothing, but, stepping to the door, he blew his whistle. Two ofhis constables came at the call.
"I have no alternative, Mr. Cunningham," said he. "I trust that thismay all prove to be an absurd mistake, but you can see that--Ah,would you? Drop it!" He struck out with his hand, and a revolverwhich the younger man was in the act of cocking clattered down uponthe floor.
"Keep that," said Holmes, quietly putting his foot upon it; "you willfind it useful at the trial. But this is what we really wanted." Heheld up a little crumpled piece of paper.
"The remainder of the sheet!" cried the Inspector.
"Precisely."
"And where was it?"
"Where I was sure it must be. I'll make the whole matter clear to youpresently. I think, Colonel, that you and Watson might return now,and I will be with you again in an hour at the furthest. TheInspector and I must have a word with the prisoners, but you willcertainly see me back at luncheon time."
Sherlock Holmes was as good as his word, for about one o'clock herejoined us in the Colonel's smoking-room. He was accompanied by alittle elderly gentleman, who was introduced to me as the Mr. Actonwhose house had been the scene of the original burglary.
"I wished Mr. Acton to be present while I demonstrated this smallmatter to you," said Holmes, "for it is natural that he should take akeen interest in the details. I am afraid, my dear Colonel, that youmust regret the hour that you took in such a stormy petrel as I am."
"On the contrary," answered the Colonel, warmly, "I consider it thegreatest privilege to have been permitted to study your methods ofworking. I confess that they quite surpass my expectations, and thatI am utterly unable to account for your result. I have not yet seenthe vestige of a clue."
"I am afraid that my explanation may disillusion you but it hasalways been my habit to hide none of my methods, either from myfriend Watson or from any one who might take an intelligent interestin them. But, first, as I am rather shaken by the knocking aboutwhich I had in the dressing-room, I think that I shall help myself toa dash of your brandy, Colonel. My strength had been rather tried oflate."
"I trust that you had no more of those nervous attacks."
Sherlock Holmes laughed heartily. "We will come to that in its turn,"said he. "I will lay an account of the case before you in its dueorder, showing you the various points which guided me in my decision.Pray interrupt me if there is any inference which is not perfectlyclear to you.
"It is of the highest importance in the art of detection to be ableto recognize, out of a number of facts, which are incidental andwhich vital. Otherwise your energy and attention must be dissipatedinstead of being concentrated. Now, in this case there was not theslightest doubt in my mind from the first that the key of the wholematter must be looked for in the scrap of paper in the dead man'shand.
"Before going into this, I would draw your attention to the factthat, if Alec Cunningham's narrative was correct, and if theassailant, after shooting William Kirwan, had instantly fled, then itobviously could not be he who tore the paper from the dead man'shand. But if it was not he, it must have been Alec Cunninghamhimself, for by the time that the old man had descended severalservants were upon the scene. The point is a simple one, but theInspector had overlooked it because he had started with thesupposition that these county magnates had had nothing to do with thematter. Now, I make a point of never having any prejudices, and offollowing docilely wherever fact may lead me, and so, in the veryfirst stage of the investigation, I found myself looking a littleaskance at the part which had been played by Mr. Alec Cunningham.
"And now I made a very careful examination of the corner of paperwhich the Inspector had submitted to us. It was at once clear to methat it formed part of a very remarkable document. Here it is. Do younot now observed something very suggestive about it?"
"It has a very irregular look," said the Colonel.
"My dear sir," cried Holmes, "there cannot be the least doubt in theworld that it has been written by two persons doing alternate words.When I draw your attention to the strong t's of 'at' and 'to', andask you to compare them with the weak ones of 'quarter' and 'twelve,'you will instantly recognize the fact. A very brief analysis of thesefour words would enable you to say with the utmost confidence thatthe 'learn' and the 'maybe' are written in the stronger hand, and the'what' in the weaker."
"By Jove, it's as clear as day!" cried the Colonel. "Why on earthshould two men write a letter in such a fashion?"
"Obviously the business was a bad one, and one of the men whodistrusted the other was determined that, whatever was done, eachshould have an equal hand in it. Now, of the two men, it is clearthat the one who wrote the 'at' and 'to' was the ringleader."
"How do you get at that?"
"We might deduce it from the mere character of the one hand ascompared with the other. But we have more assured reasons than thatfor supposing it. If you examine this scrap with attention you willcome to the conclusion that the man with the stronger hand wrote allhis words first, leaving blanks for the other to fill up. Theseblanks were not always sufficient, and you can see that the secondman had a squeeze to fit his 'quarter' in between the 'at' and the'to,' showing that the latter were already written. The man who wroteall his words first is undoubtedly the man who planned the affair."
"Excellent!" cried Mr. Acton.
"But very superficial," said Holmes. "We come now, however, to apoint which is of importance. You may not be aware that the deductionof a man's age from his writing is one which has been brought toconsiderable accuracy by experts. In normal cases one can place a manin his true decade with tolerable confidence. I say normal cases,because ill-health and physical weakness reproduce the signs of oldage, even when the invalid is a youth. In this case, looking at thebold, strong hand of the one, and the rather broken-backed appearanceof the other, which still retains its legibility although the t'shave begun to lose their crossing, we can say that the one was ayoung man and the other was advanced in years without beingpositively decrepit."
"Excellent!" cried Mr. Acton again.
"There is a further point, however, which is subtler and of greaterinterest. There is something in common between these hands. Theybelong to men who are blood-relatives. It may be most obvious to youin the Greek e's, but to me there are many small points whichindicate the same thing. I have no doubt at all that a familymannerism can be traced in these two specimens of writing. I am only,of course, giving you the leading results now of my examination ofthe paper. There were twenty-three other deductions which would be ofmore interest to experts than to you. They all tended to deepen theimpression upon my mind that the Cunninghams, father and son, hadwritten this letter.
"Having got so far, my next step was, of course, to examine into thedetails of the crime, and to see how far they would help us. I wentup to the house with the Inspector, and saw all that was to be seen.The wound upon the dead man was, as I was able to determine withabsolute confidence, fired from a revolver at the distance ofsomething over four yards. There was no powder-blackening on theclothes. Evidently, therefore, Alec Cunningham had lied when he saidthat the two men were struggling when the shot was fired. Again, bothfather and son agreed as to the place where the man escaped into theroad. At that point, however, as it happens, there is a broadishditch, moist at the bottom. As there were no indications of bootmarksabout this ditch, I was absolutely sure not only that the Cunninghamshad again lied, but that there had never been any unknown man uponthe scene at all.
"And now I have to consider the motive of this singular crime. To getat this, I endeavored first of all to solve the reason of theoriginal burglary at Mr. Acton's. I understood, from something whichthe Colonel told us, that a lawsuit had been going on between you,Mr. Acton, and the Cunninghams. Of course, it instantly occurred tome that they had broken into your library with the intention ofgetting at some document which might be of importance in the case."
"Precisely so," said Mr. Acton. "There can be no possible doubt as totheir intentions. I have the clearest claim upon half of theirpresent estate, and if they could have found a single paper--which,fortunately, was in the strong-box of my solicitors--they wouldundoubtedly have crippled our case."
"There you are," said Holmes, smiling. "It was a dangerous, recklessattempt, in which I seem to trace the influence of young Alec. Havingfound nothing they tried to divert suspicion by making it appear tobe an ordinary burglary, to which end they carried off whatever theycould lay their hands upon. That is all clear enough, but there wasmuch that was still obscure. What I wanted above all was to get themissing part of that note. I was certain that Alec had torn it out ofthe dead man's hand, and almost certain that he must have thrust itinto the pocket of his dressing-gown. Where else could he have putit? The only question was whether it was still there. It was worth aneffort to find out, and for that object we all went up to the house.
"The Cunninghams joined us, as you doubtless remember, outside thekitchen door. It was, of course, of the very first importance thatthey should not be reminded of the existence of this paper, otherwisethey would naturally destroy it without delay. The Inspector wasabout to tell them the importance which we attached to it when, bythe luckiest chance in the world, I tumbled down in a sort of fit andso changed the conversation."
"Good heavens!" cried the Colonel, laughing, "do you mean to say allour sympathy was wasted and your fit an imposture?"
"Speaking professionally, it was admirably done," cried I, looking inamazement at this man who was forever confounding me with some newphase of his astuteness.
"It is an art which is often useful," said he. "When I recovered Imanaged, by a device which had perhaps some little merit ofingenuity, to get old Cunningham to write the word 'twelve,' so thatI might compare it with the 'twelve' upon the paper."
"Oh, what an ass I have been!" I exclaimed.
"I could see that you were commiserating with me over my weakness,"said Holmes, laughing. "I was sorry to cause you the sympathetic painwhich I know that you felt. We then went upstairs together, andhaving entered the room and seen the dressing-gown hanging up behindthe door, I contrived, by upsetting a table, to engage theirattention for the moment, and slipped back to examine the pockets. Ihad hardly got the paper, however--which was, as I had expected, inone of them--when the two Cunninghams were on me, and would, I verilybelieve, have murdered me then and there but for your prompt andfriendly aid. As it is, I feel that young man's grip on my throatnow, and the father has twisted my wrist round in the effort to getthe paper out of my hand. They saw that I must know all about it, yousee, and the sudden change from absolute security to complete despairmade them perfectly desperate.
"I had a little talk with old Cunningham afterwards as to the motiveof the crime. He was tractable enough, though his son was a perfectdemon, ready to blow out his own or anybody else's brains if he couldhave got to his revolver. When Cunningham saw that the case againsthim was so strong he lost all heart and made a clean breast ofeverything. It seems that William had secretly followed his twomasters on the night when they made their raid upon Mr. Acton's, andhaving thus got them into his power, proceeded, under threats ofexposure, to levy black-mail upon them. Mr. Alec, however, was adangerous man to play games of that sort with. It was a stroke ofpositive genius on his part to see in the burglary scare which wasconvulsing the country side an opportunity of plausibly getting ridof the man whom he feared. William was decoyed up and shot, and hadthey only got the whole of the note and paid a little more attentionto detail in the accessories, it is very possible that suspicionmight never have been aroused."
"And the note?" I asked.
Sherlock Holmes placed the subjoined paper before us.
[ Picture: Paper which reads: If you will only come around at quarterto twelve to the east gate you will learn what will very muchsurprise you and may be of the greatest service to you and also toAnnie Morrison. But say nothing to anyone upon the matter ]
"It is very much the sort of thing that I expected," said he. "Ofcourse, we do not yet know what the relations may have been betweenAlec Cunningham, William Kirwan, and Annie Morrison. The resultsshows that the trap was skillfully baited. I am sure that you cannotfail to be delighted with the traces of heredity shown in the p's andin the tails of the g's. The absence of the i-dots in the old man'swriting is also most characteristic. Watson, I think our quiet restin the country has been a distinct success, and I shall certainlyreturn much invigorated to Baker Street to-morrow." 





                            THE CROOKED MAN
One summer night, a few months after my marriage, I was seated by myown hearth smoking a last pipe and nodding over a novel, for my day'swork had been an exhausting one.  My wife had already gone upstairs,and the sound of the locking of the hall door some time before toldme that the servants had also retired.  I had risen from my seat andwas knocking out the ashes of my pipe when I suddenly heard the clangof the bell.
I looked at the clock.  It was a quarter to twelve.  This could notbe a visitor at so late an hour.  A patient, evidently, and possiblyan all-night sitting.  With a wry face I went out into the hall andopened the door.  To my astonishment it was Sherlock Holmes who stoodupon my step.
"Ah, Watson," said he, "I hoped that I might not be too late to catchyou."
"My dear fellow, pray come in."
"You look surprised, and no wonder!  Relieved, too, I fancy!  Hum! You still smoke the Arcadia mixture of your bachelor days then! There's no mistaking that fluffy ash upon your coat.  It's easy totell that you have been accustomed to wear a uniform, Watson.  You'llnever pass as a pure-bred civilian as long as you keep that habit ofcarrying your handkerchief in your sleeve.  Could you put me uptonight?"
"With pleasure."
"You told me that you had bachelor quarters for one, and I see thatyou have no gentleman visitor at present.  Your hat-stand proclaimsas much."
"I shall be delighted if you will stay."
"Thank you.  I'll fill the vacant peg then.  Sorry to see that you'vehad the British workman in the house.  He's a token of evil.  Not thedrains, I hope?"
"No, the gas."
"Ah!  He has left two nail-marks from his boot upon your linoleumjust where the light strikes it.  No, thank you, I had some supper atWaterloo, but I'll smoke a pipe with you with pleasure."
I handed him my pouch, and he seated himself opposite to me andsmoked for some time in silence.  I was well aware that nothing butbusiness of importance would have brought him to me at such an hour,so I waited patiently until he should come round to it.
"I see that you are professionally rather busy just now," said he,glancing very keenly across at me.
"Yes, I've had a busy day," I answered.  "It may seem very foolish inyour eyes," I added, "but really I don't know how you deduced it."
Holmes chuckled to himself.
"I have the advantage of knowing your habits, my dear Watson," saidhe.  "When your round is a short one you walk, and when it is a longone you use a hansom.  As I perceive that your boots, although used,are by no means dirty, I cannot doubt that you are at present busyenough to justify the hansom."
"Excellent!" I cried.
"Elementary," said he.  "It is one of those instances where thereasoner can produce an effect which seems remarkable to hisneighbor, because the latter has missed the one little point which isthe basis of the deduction.  The same may be said, my dear fellow,for the effect of some of these little sketches of yours, which isentirely meretricious, depending as it does upon your retaining inyour own hands some factors in the problem which are never impartedto the reader.  Now, at present I am in the position of these samereaders, for I hold in this hand several threads of one of thestrangest cases which ever perplexed a man's brain, and yet I lackthe one or two which are needful to complete my theory.  But I'llhave them, Watson, I'll have them!"  His eyes kindled and a slightflush sprang into his thin cheeks. For an instant the veil had liftedupon his keen, intense nature, but for an instant only. When Iglanced again his face had resumed that red-Indian composure whichhad made so many regard him as a machine rather than a man.
"The problem presents features of interest," said he.  "I may evensay exceptional features of interest.  I have already looked into thematter, and have come, as I think, within sight of my solution.  Ifyou could accompany me in that last step you might be of considerableservice to me."
"I should be delighted."
"Could you go as far as Aldershot to-morrow?"
"I have no doubt Jackson would take my practice."
"Very good.  I want to start by the 11.10 from Waterloo."
"That would give me time."
"Then, if you are not too sleepy, I will give you a sketch of whathas happened, and of what remains to be done."
"I was sleepy before you came.  I am quite wakeful now."
"I will compress the story as far as may be done without omittinganything vital to the case.  It is conceivable that you may even haveread some account of the matter.  It is the supposed murder ofColonel Barclay, of the Royal Munsters, at Aldershot, which I aminvestigating."
"I have heard nothing of it."
"It has not excited much attention yet, except locally.  The factsare only two days old.  Briefly they are these:
"The Royal Munsters is, as you know, one of the most famous Irishregiments in the British army.  It did wonders both in the Crimea andthe Mutiny, and has since that time distinguished itself upon everypossible occasion.  It was commanded up to Monday night by JamesBarclay, a gallant veteran, who started as a full private, was raisedto commissioned rank for his bravery at the time of the Mutiny, andso lived to command the regiment in which he had once carried amusket.
"Colonel Barclay had married at the time when he was a sergeant, andhis wife, whose maiden name was Miss Nancy Devoy, was the daughter ofa former color-sergeant in the same corps.  There was, therefore, ascan be imagined, some little social friction when the young couple(for they were still young) found themselves in their newsurroundings.  They appear, however, to have quickly adaptedthemselves, and Mrs. Barclay has always, I understand, been aspopular with the ladies of the regiment as her husband was with hisbrother officers.  I may add that she was a woman of great beauty,and that even now, when she has been married for upwards of thirtyyears, she is still of a striking and queenly appearance.
"Colonel Barclay's family life appears to have been a uniformly happyone.  Major Murphy, to whom I owe most of my facts, assures me thathe has never heard of any misunderstanding between the pair.  On thewhole, he thinks that Barclay's devotion to his wife was greater thanhis wife's to Barclay.  He was acutely uneasy if he were absent fromher for a day.  She, on the other hand, though devoted and faithful,was less obtrusively affectionate.  But they were regarded in theregiment as the very model of a middle-aged couple.  There wasabsolutely nothing in their mutual relations to prepare people forthe tragedy which was to follow.
"Colonel Barclay himself seems to have had some singular traits inhis character.  He was a dashing, jovial old solder in his usualmood, but there were occasions on which he seemed to show himselfcapable of considerable violence and vindictiveness.  This side ofhis nature, however, appears never to have been turned towards hiswife.  Another fact, which had struck Major Murphy and three out offive of the other officers with whom I conversed, was the singularsort of depression which came upon him at times.  As the majorexpressed it, the smile had often been struck from his mouth, as ifby some invisible hand, when he has been joining the gaieties andchaff of the mess-table.  For days on end, when the mood was on him,he has been sunk in the deepest gloom.  This and a certain tinge ofsuperstition were the only unusual traits in his character which hisbrother officers had observed.  The latter peculiarity took the formof a dislike to being left alone, especially after dark.  Thispuerile feature in a nature which was conspicuously manly had oftengiven rise to comment and conjecture.
"The first battalion of the Royal Munsters (which is the old 117th)has been stationed at Aldershot for some years.  The married officerslive out of barracks, and the Colonel has during all this timeoccupied a villa called Lachine, about half a mile from the northcamp.  The house stands in its own grounds, but the west side of itis not more than thirty yards from the high-road.  A coachman and twomaids form the staff of servants.  These with their master andmistress were the sole occupants of Lachine, for the Barclays had nochildren, nor was it usual for them to have resident visitors.
"Now for the events at Lachine between nine and ten on the evening oflast Monday.
"Mrs. Barclay was, it appears, a member of the Roman Catholic Church,and had interested herself very much in the establishment of theGuild of St. George, which was formed in connection with the WattStreet Chapel for the purpose of supplying the poor with cast-offclothing.  A meeting of the Guild had been held that evening ateight, and Mrs. Barclay had hurried over her dinner in order to bepresent at it.  When leaving the house she was heard by the coachmanto make some commonplace remark to her husband, and to assure himthat she would be back before very long. She then called for MissMorrison, a young lady who lives in the next villa, and the two wentoff together to their meeting.  It lasted forty minutes, and at aquarter-past nine Mrs. Barclay returned home, having left MissMorrison at her door as she passed.
"There is a room which is used as a morning-room at Lachine.  Thisfaces the road and opens by a large glass folding-door on to thelawn.  The lawn is thirty yards across, and is only divided from thehighway by a low wall with an iron rail above it.  It was into thisroom that Mrs. Barclay went upon her return.  The blinds were notdown, for the room was seldom used in the evening, but Mrs. Barclayherself lit the lamp and then rang the bell, asking Jane Stewart, thehouse-maid, to bring her a cup of tea, which was quite contrary toher usual habits.  The Colonel had been sitting in the dining-room,but hearing that his wife had returned he joined her in themorning-room.  The coachman saw him cross the hall and enter it.  Hewas never seen again alive.
"The tea which had been ordered was brought up at the end of tenminutes; but the maid, as she approached the door, was surprised tohear the voices of her master and mistress in furious altercation. She knocked without receiving any answer, and even turned the handle,but only to find that the door was locked upon the inside.  Naturallyenough she ran down to tell the cook, and the two women with thecoachman came up into the hall and listened to the dispute which wasstill raging.  They all agreed that only two voices were to be heard,those of Barclay and of his wife.  Barclay's remarks were subdued andabrupt, so that none of them were audible to the listeners.  Thelady's, on the other hand, were most bitter, and when she raised hervoice could be plainly heard.  'You coward!' she repeated over andover again.  'What can be done now?  What can be done now?  Give meback my life.  I will never so much as breathe the same air with youagain!  You coward!  You Coward!'  Those were scraps of herconversation, ending in a sudden dreadful cry in the man's voice,with a crash, and a piercing scream from the woman.  Convinced thatsome tragedy had occurred, the coachman rushed to the door and stroveto force it, while scream after scream issued from within.  He wasunable, however, to make his way in, and the maids were toodistracted with fear to be of any assistance to him.  A suddenthought struck him, however, and he ran through the hall door andround to the lawn upon which the long French windows open.  One sideof the window was open, which I understand was quite usual in thesummer-time, and he passed without difficulty into the room.  Hismistress had ceased to scream and was stretched insensible upon acouch, while with his feet tilted over the side of an arm-chair, andhis head upon the ground near the corner of the fender, was lying theunfortunate soldier stone dead in a pool of his own blood.
"Naturally, the coachman's first thought, on finding that he could donothing for his master, was to open the door.  But here an unexpectedand singular difficulty presented itself.  The key was not in theinner side of the door, nor could he find it anywhere in the room. He went out again, therefore, through the window, and having obtainedthe help of a policeman and of a medical man, he returned.  The lady,against whom naturally the strongest suspicion rested, was removed toher room, still in a state of insensibility.  The Colonel's body wasthen placed upon the sofa, and a careful examination made of thescene of the tragedy.
"The injury from which the unfortunate veteran was suffering wasfound to be a jagged cut some two inches long at the back part of hishead, which had evidently been caused by a violent blow from a bluntweapon.  Nor was it difficult to guess what that weapon may havebeen.  Upon the floor, close to the body, was lying a singular clubof hard carved wood with a bone handle.  The Colonel possessed avaried collection of weapons brought from the different countries inwhich he had fought, and it is conjectured by the police that hisclub was among his trophies.  The servants deny having seen itbefore, but among the numerous curiosities in the house it ispossible that it may have been overlooked.  Nothing else ofimportance was discovered in the room by the police, save theinexplicable fact that neither upon Mrs. Barclay's person nor uponthat of the victim nor in any part of the room was the missing key tobe found.  The door had eventually to be opened by a locksmith fromAldershot.
"That was the state of things, Watson, when upon the Tuesday morningI, at the request of Major Murphy, went down to Aldershot tosupplement the efforts of the police.  I think that you willacknowledge that the problem was already one of interest, but myobservations soon made me realize that it was in truth much moreextraordinary than would at first sight appear.
"Before examining the room I cross-questioned the servants, but onlysucceeded in eliciting the facts which I have already stated.  Oneother detail of interest was remembered by Jane Stewart, thehousemaid.  You will remember that on hearing the sound of thequarrel she descended and returned with the other servants.  On thatfirst occasion, when she was alone, she says that the voices of hermaster and mistress were sunk so low that she could hear hardlyanything, and judged by their tones rather than their words that theyhad fallen out.  On my pressing her, however, she remembered that sheheard the word David uttered twice by the lady.  The point is of theutmost importance as guiding us towards the reason of the suddenquarrel.  The Colonel's name, you remember, was James.
"There was one thing in the case which had made the deepestimpression both upon the servants and the police.  This was thecontortion of the Colonel's face.  It had set, according to theiraccount, into the most dreadful expression of fear and horror which ahuman countenance is capable of assuming.  More than one personfainted at the mere sight of him, so terrible was the effect.  It wasquite certain that he had foreseen his fate, and that it had causedhim the utmost horror.  This, of course, fitted in well enough withthe police theory, if the Colonel could have seen his wife making amurderous attack upon him.  Nor was the fact of the wound being onthe back of his head a fatal objection to this, as he might haveturned to avoid the blow.  No information could be got from the ladyherself, who was temporarily insane from an acute attack ofbrain-fever.
"From the police I learned that Miss Morrison, who you remember wentout that evening with Mrs. Barclay, denied having any knowledge ofwhat it was which had caused the ill-humor in which her companion hadreturned.
"Having gathered these facts, Watson, I smoked several pipes overthem, trying to separate those which were crucial from others whichwere merely incidental.  There could be no question that the mostdistinctive and suggestive point in the case was the singulardisappearance of the door-key.  A most careful search had failed todiscover it in the room.  Therefore it must have been taken from it. But neither the Colonel nor the Colonel's wife could have taken it. That was perfectly clear.  Therefore a third person must have enteredthe room.  And that third person could only have come in through thewindow.  It seemed to me that a careful examination of the room andthe lawn might possibly reveal some traces of this mysteriousindividual.  You know my methods, Watson.  There was not one of themwhich I did not apply to the inquiry.  And it ended by my discoveringtraces, but very different ones from those which I had expected. There had been a man in the room, and he had crossed the lawn comingfrom the road.  I was able to obtain five very clear impressions ofhis foot-marks:  one in the roadway itself, at the point where he hadclimbed the low wall, two on the lawn, and two very faint ones uponthe stained boards near the window where he had entered.  He hadapparently rushed across the lawn, for his toe-marks were much deeperthan his heels.  But it was not the man who surprised me.  It was hiscompanion."
"His companion!"
Holmes pulled a large sheet of tissue-paper out of his pocket andcarefully unfolded it upon his knee.
"What do you make of that?" he asked.
The paper was covered with the tracings of the foot-marks of somesmall animal.  It had five well-marked foot-pads, an indication oflong nails, and the whole print might be nearly as large as  adessert-spoon.
"It's a dog," said I.
"Did you ever hear of a dog running up a curtain?  I found distincttraces that this creature had done so."
"A monkey, then?"
"But it is not the print of a monkey."
"What can it be, then?"
"Neither dog nor cat nor monkey nor any creature that we are familiarwith.  I have tried to reconstruct it from the measurements.  Hereare four prints where the beast has been standing motionless.  Yousee that it is no less than fifteen inches from fore-foot to hind. Add to that the length of neck and head, and you get a creature notmuch less than two feet long--probably more if there is any tail. But now observe this other measurement.  The animal has been moving,and we have the length of its stride.  In each case it is only aboutthree inches.  You have an indication, you see, of a long body withvery short legs attached to it.  It has not been considerate enoughto leave any of its hair behind it.  But its general shape must bewhat I have indicated, and it can run up a curtain, and it iscarnivorous."
"How do you deduce that?"
"Because it ran up the curtain.  A canary's cage was hanging in thewindow, and its aim seems to have been to get at the bird."
"Then what was the beast?"
"Ah, if I could give it a name it might go a long way towards solvingthe case.  On the whole, it was probably some creature of the weaseland stoat tribe--and yet it is larger than any of these that I haveseen."
"But what had it to do with the crime?"
"That, also, is still obscure.  But we have learned a good deal, youperceive.  We know that a man stood in the road looking at thequarrel between the Barclays--the blinds were up and the roomlighted.  We know, also, that he ran across the lawn, entered theroom, accompanied by a strange animal, and that he either struck theColonel or, as is equally possible, that the Colonel fell down fromsheer fright at the sight of him, and cut his head on the corner ofthe fender.  Finally, we have the curious fact that the intrudercarried away the key with him when he left."
"Your discoveries seem to have left the business more obscure that itwas before," said I.
"Quite so.  They undoubtedly showed that the affair was much deeperthan was at first conjectured.  I thought the matter over, and I cameto the conclusion that I must approach the case from another aspect. But really, Watson, I am keeping you up, and I might just as welltell you all this on our way to Aldershot to-morrow."
"Thank you, you have gone rather too far to stop."
"It is quite certain that when Mrs. Barclay left the house athalf-past seven she was on good terms with her husband.  She wasnever, as I think I have said, ostentatiously affectionate, but shewas heard by the coachman chatting with the Colonel in a friendlyfashion.  Now, it was equally certain that, immediately on herreturn, she had gone to the room in which she was least likely to seeher husband, had flown to tea as an agitated woman will, and finally,on his coming in to her, had broken into violent recriminations. Therefore something had occurred between seven-thirty and nineo'clock which had completely altered her feelings towards him.  ButMiss Morrison had been with her during the whole of that hour and ahalf.  It was absolutely certain, therefore, in spite of her denial,that she must know something of the matter.
"My first conjecture was, that possibly there had been some passagesbetween this young lady and the old soldier, which the former had nowconfessed to the wife.  That would account for the angry return, andalso for the girl's denial that anything had occurred.  Nor would itbe entirely incompatible with most of the words overhead.  But therewas the reference to David, and there was the known affection of theColonel for his wife, to weigh against it, to say nothing of thetragic intrusion of this other man, which might, of course, beentirely disconnected with what had gone before.  It was not easy topick one's steps, but, on the whole, I was inclined to dismiss theidea that there had been anything between the Colonel and MissMorrison, but more than ever convinced that the young lady held theclue as to what it was which had turned Mrs. Barclay to hatred of herhusband.  I took the obvious course, therefore, of calling upon MissM., of explaining to her that I was perfectly certain that she heldthe facts in her possession, and of assuring her that her friend,Mrs. Barclay, might find herself in the dock upon a capital chargeunless the matter were cleared up.
"Miss Morrison is a little ethereal slip of a girl, with timid eyesand blond hair, but I found her by no means wanting in shrewdness andcommon-sense.  She sat thinking for some time after I had spoken, andthen, turning to me with a brisk air of resolution, she broke into aremarkable statement which I will condense for your benefit.
"'I promised my friend that I would say nothing of the matter, and apromise is a promise,' said she; 'but if I can really help her whenso serious a charge is laid against her, and when her own mouth, poordarling, is closed by illness, then I think I am absolved from mypromise.  I will tell you exactly what happened upon Monday evening.
"'We were returning from the Watt Street Mission about a quarter tonine o'clock.  On our way we had to pass through Hudson Street, whichis a very quiet thoroughfare.  There is only one lamp in it, upon theleft-hand side, and as we approached this lamp I saw a man comingtowards us with is back very bent, and something like a box slungover one of his shoulders.  He appeared to be deformed, for hecarried his head low and walked with his knees bent.  We were passinghim when he raised his face to look at us in the circle of lightthrown by the lamp, and as he did so he stopped and screamed out in adreadful voice, "My God, it's Nancy!"  Mrs. Barclay turned as whiteas death, and would have fallen down had the dreadful-lookingcreature not caught hold of her.  I was going to call for the police,but she, to my surprise, spoke quite civilly to the fellow.
"'"I thought you had been dead this thirty years, Henry," said she,in a shaking voice.
"'"So I have," said he, and it was awful to hear the tones that hesaid it in.  He had a very dark, fearsome face, and a gleam in hiseyes that comes back to me in my dreams.  His hair and whiskers wereshot with gray, and his face was all crinkled and puckered like awithered apple.
"'"Just walk on a little way, dear," said Mrs. Barclay; "I want tohave a word with this man.  There is nothing to be afraid of."  Shetried to speak boldly, but she was still deadly pale and could hardlyget her words out for the trembling of her lips.
"'I did as she asked me, and they talked together for a few minutes. Then she came down the street with her eyes blazing, and I saw thecrippled wretch standing by the lamp-post and shaking his clenchedfists in the air as if he were mad with rage.  She never said a worduntil we were at the door here, when she took me by the hand andbegged me to tell no one what had happened.
"'"It's an old acquaintance of mine who has come down in the world,"said she.  When I promised her I would say nothing she kissed me, andI have never seen her since.  I have told you now the whole truth,and if I withheld it from the police it is because I did not realizethen the danger in which my dear friend stood.  I know that it canonly be to her advantage that everything should be known.'
"There was her statement, Watson, and to me, as you can imagine, itwas like a light on a dark night.  Everything which had beendisconnected before began at once to assume its true place, and I hada shadowy presentiment of the whole sequence of events.  My next stepobviously was to find the man who had produced such a remarkableimpression upon Mrs. Barclay.  If he were still in Aldershot itshould not be a very difficult matter.  There are not such a verygreat number of civilians, and a deformed man was sure to haveattracted attention.  I spent a day in the search, and byevening--this very evening, Watson--I had run him down.  The man'sname is Henry Wood, and he lives in lodgings in this same street inwhich the ladies met him.  He has only been five days in the place. In the character of a registration-agent I had a most interestinggossip with his landlady.  The man is by trade a conjurer andperformer, going round the canteens after nightfall, and giving alittle entertainment at each.  He carries some creature about withhim in that box; about which the landlady seemed to be inconsiderable trepidation, for she had never seen an animal like it. He uses it in some of his tricks according to her account.  So muchthe woman was able to tell me, and also that it was a wonder the manlived, seeing how twisted he was, and that he spoke in a strangetongue sometimes, and that for the last two nights she had heard himgroaning and weeping in his bedroom.  He was all right, as far asmoney went, but in his deposit he had given her what looked like abad florin.  She showed it to me, Watson, and it was an Indian rupee.
"So now, my dear fellow, you see exactly how we stand and why it is Iwant you.  It is perfectly plain that after the ladies parted fromthis man he followed them at a distance, that he saw the quarrelbetween husband and wife through the window, that he rushed in, andthat the creature which he carried in his box got loose.  That is allvery certain.  But he is the only person in this world who can tellus exactly what happened in that room."
"And you intend to ask him?"
"Most certainly--but in the presence of a witness."
"And I am the witness?"
"If you will be so good.  If he can clear the matter up, well andgood.  If he refuses, we have no alternative but to apply for awarrant."
"But how do you know he'll be there when we return?"
"You may be sure that I took some precautions.  I have one of myBaker Street boys mounting guard over him who would stick to him likea burr, go where he might.  We shall find him in Hudson Streetto-morrow, Watson, and meanwhile I should be the criminal myself if Ikept you out of bed any longer."
It was midday when we found ourselves at the scene of the tragedy,and, under my companion's guidance, we made our way at once to HudsonStreet.  In spite of his capacity for concealing his emotions, Icould easily see that Holmes was in a state of suppressed excitement,while I was myself tingling with that half-sporting,half-intellectual pleasure which I invariably experienced when Iassociated myself with him in his investigations.
"This is the street," said he, as we turned into a short thoroughfarelined with plain two-storied brick houses.  "Ah, here is Simpson toreport."
"He's in all right, Mr. Holmes," cried a small street Arab, runningup to us.
"Good, Simpson!" said Holmes, patting him on the head.  "Come along,Watson.  This is the house."  He sent in his card with a message thathe had come on important business, and a moment later we were face toface with the man whom we had come to see.  In spite of the warmweather he was crouching over a fire, and the little room was like anoven.  The man sat all twisted and huddled in his chair in a waywhich gave an indescribably impression of deformity; but the facewhich he turned towards us, though worn and swarthy, must at sometime have been remarkable for its beauty.  He looked suspiciously atus now out of yellow-shot, bilious eyes, and, without speaking orrising, he waved towards two chairs.
"Mr. Henry Wood, late of India, I believe," said Holmes, affably. "I've come over this little matter of Colonel Barclay's death."
"What should I know about that?"
"That's what I want to ascertain.  You know, I suppose, that unlessthe matter is cleared up, Mrs. Barclay, who is an old friend ofyours, will in all probability be tried for murder."
The man gave a violent start.
"I don't know who you are," he cried, "nor how you come to know whatyou do know, but will you swear that this is true that you tell me?"
"Why, they are only waiting for her to come to her senses to arresther."
"My God!  Are you in the police yourself?"
"No."
"What business is it of yours, then?"
"It's every man's business to see justice done."
"You can take my word that she is innocent."
"Then you are guilty."
"No, I am not."
"Who killed Colonel James Barclay, then?"
"It was a just providence that killed him.  But, mind you this, thatif I had knocked his brains out, as it was in my heart to do, hewould have had no more than his due from my hands.  If his own guiltyconscience had not struck him down it is likely enough that I mighthave had his blood upon my soul.  You want me to tell the story. Well, I don't know why I shouldn't, for there's no cause for me to beashamed of it.
"It was in this way, sir.  You see me now with my back like a cameland by ribs all awry, but there was a time when Corporal Henry Woodwas the smartest man in the 117th foot.  We were in India then, incantonments, at a place we'll call Bhurtee.  Barclay, who died theother day, was sergeant in the same company as myself, and the belleof the regiment, ay, and the finest girl that ever had the breath oflife between her lips, was Nancy Devoy, the daughter of thecolor-sergeant.  There were two men that loved her, and one that sheloved, and you'll smile when you look at this poor thing huddledbefore the fire, and hear me say that it was for my good looks thatshe loved me.
"Well, though I had her heart, her father was set upon her marryingBarclay.  I was a harum-scarum, reckless lad, and he had had aneducation, and was already marked for the sword-belt.  But the girlheld true to me, and it seemed that I would have had her when theMutiny broke out, and all hell was loose in the country.
"We were shut up in Bhurtee, the regiment of us with half a batteryof artillery, a company of Sikhs, and a lot of civilians andwomen-folk.  There were ten thousand rebels round us, and they wereas keen as a set of terriers round a rat-cage.  About the second weekof it our water gave out, and it was a question whether we couldcommunicate with General Neill's column, which was moving up country. It was our only chance, for we could not hope to fight our way outwith all the women and children, so I volunteered to go out and towarn General Neill of our danger.  My offer was accepted, and Italked it over with Sergeant Barclay, who was supposed to know theground better than any other man, and who drew up a route by which Imight get through the rebel lines.  At ten o'clock the same night Istarted off upon my journey.  There were a thousand lives to save,but it was of only one that I was thinking when I dropped over thewall that night.
"My way ran down a dried-up watercourse, which we hoped would screenme from the enemy's sentries; but as I crept round the corner of it Iwalked right into six of them, who were crouching down in the darkwaiting for me.  In an instant I was stunned with a blow and boundhand and foot.  But the real blow was to my heart and not to my head,for as I came to and listened to as much as I could understand oftheir talk, I heard enough to tell me that my comrade, the very manwho had arranged the way that I was to take, had betrayed me by meansof a native servant into the hands of the enemy.
"Well, there's no need for me to dwell on that part of it.  You knownow what James Barclay was capable of.  Bhurtee was relieved by Neillnext day, but the rebels took me away with them in their retreat, andit was many a long year before ever I saw a white face again.  I wastortured and tried to get away, and was captured and tortured again. You can see for yourselves the state in which I was left.  Some ofthem that fled into Nepal took me with them, and then afterwards Iwas up past Darjeeling.  The hill-folk up there murdered the rebelswho had me, and I became their slave for a time until I escaped; butinstead of going south I had to go north, until I found myself amongthe Afghans.  There I wandered about for many a year, and at lastcame back to the Punjaub, where I lived mostly among the natives andpicked up a living by the conjuring tricks that I had learned.  Whatuse was it for me, a wretched cripple, to go back to England or tomake myself known to my old comrades?  Even my wish for revenge wouldnot make me do that.  I had rather that Nancy and my old pals shouldthink of Harry Wood as having died with a straight back, than see himliving and crawling with a stick like a chimpanzee.  They neverdoubted that I was dead, and I meant that they never should.  I heardthat Barclay had married Nancy, and that he was rising rapidly in theregiment, but even that did not make me speak.
"But when one gets old one has a longing for home.  For years I'vebeen dreaming of the bright green fields and the hedges of England. At last I determined to see them before I died.  I saved enough tobring me across, and then I came here where the soldiers are, for Iknow their ways and how to amuse them and so earn enough to keep me."
"Your narrative is most interesting," said Sherlock Holmes.  "I havealready heard of your meeting with Mrs. Barclay, and your mutualrecognition.  You then, as I understand, followed her home and sawthrough the window an altercation between her husband and her, inwhich she doubtless cast his conduct to you in his teeth.  Your ownfeelings overcame you, and you ran across the lawn and broke in uponthem."
"I did, sir, and at the sight of me he looked as I have never seen aman look before, and over he went with his head on the fender.  Buthe was dead before he fell.  I read death on his face as plain as Ican read that text over the fire.  The bare sight of me was like abullet through his guilty heart."
"And then?"
"Then Nancy fainted, and I caught up the key of the door from herhand, intending to unlock it and get help.  But as I was doing it itseemed to me better to leave it alone and get away, for the thingmight look black against me, and any way my secret would be out if Iwere taken.  In my haste I thrust the key into my pocket, and droppedmy stick while I was chasing Teddy, who had run up the curtain.  WhenI got him into his box, from which he had slipped, I was off as fastas I could run."
"Who's Teddy?" asked Holmes.
The man leaned over and pulled up the front of a kind of hutch in thecorner.  In an instant out there slipped a beautiful reddish-browncreature, thin and lithe, with the legs of a stoat, a long, thinnose, and a pair of the finest red eyes that ever I saw in ananimal's head.
"It's a mongoose," I cried.
"Well, some call them that, and some call them ichneumon," said theman.  "Snake-catcher is what I call them, and Teddy is amazing quickon cobras.  I have one here without the fangs, and Teddy catches itevery night to please the folk in the canteen.
"Any other point, sir?"
"Well, we may have to apply to you again if Mrs. Barclay should proveto be in serious trouble."
"In that case, of course, I'd come forward."
"But if not, there is no object in raking up this scandal against adead man, foully as he has acted.  You have at least the satisfactionof knowing that for thirty years of his life his conscience bitterlyreproached him for this wicked deed.  Ah, there goes Major Murphy onthe other side of the street.  Good-bye, Wood.  I want to learn ifanything has happened since yesterday."
We were in time to overtake the major before he reached the corner.
"Ah, Holmes," he said:  "I suppose you have heard that all this fusshas come to nothing?"
"What then?"
"The inquest is just over.  The medical evidence showed conclusivelythat death was due to apoplexy.  You see it was quite a simple caseafter all."
"Oh, remarkably superficial," said Holmes, smiling.  "Come, Watson, Idon't think we shall be wanted in Aldershot any more."
"There's one thing," said I, as we walked down to the station.  "Ifthe husband's name was James, and the other was Henry, what was thistalk about David?"
"That one word, my dear Watson, should have told me the whole storyhad I been the ideal reasoner which you are so fond of depicting.  Itwas evidently a term of reproach."
"Of reproach?"
"Yes; David strayed a little occasionally, you know, and on oneoccasion in the same direction as Sergeant James Barclay.  Youremember the small affair of Uriah and Bathsheba?  My biblicalknowledge is a trifle rusty, I fear, but you will find the story inthe first or second of Samuel."





                         THE RESIDENT PATIENT
Glancing over the somewhat incoherent series of Memoirs with which Ihave endeavored to illustrate a few of the mental peculiarities of myfriend Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I have been struck by the difficultywhich I have experienced in picking out examples which shall in everyway answer my purpose. For in those cases in which Holmes hasperformed some tour de force of analytical reasoning, and hasdemonstrated the value of his peculiar methods of investigation, thefacts themselves have often been so slight or so commonplace that Icould not feel justified in laying them before the public. On theother hand, it has frequently happened that he has been concerned insome research where the facts have been of the most remarkable anddramatic character, but where the share which he has himself taken indetermining their causes has been less pronounced than I, as hisbiographer, could wish. The small matter which I have chronicledunder the heading of "A Study in Scarlet," and that other later oneconnected with the loss of the Gloria Scott, may serve as examples ofthis Scylla and Charybdis which are forever threatening thehistorian. It may be that in the business of which I am now about towrite the part which my friend played is not sufficientlyaccentuated; and yet the whole train of circumstances is soremarkable that I cannot bring myself to omit it entirely from thisseries.
It had been a close, rainy day in October. Our blinds werehalf-drawn, and Holmes lay curled upon the sofa, reading andre-reading a letter which he had received by the morning post. Formyself, my term of service in India had trained me to stand heatbetter than cold, and a thermometer of 90 was no hardship. But thepaper was uninteresting. Parliament had risen. Everybody was out oftown, and I yearned for the glades of the New Forest or the shingleof Southsea. A depleted bank account had caused me to postpone myholiday, and as to my companion, neither the country nor the seapresented the slightest attraction to him. He loved to lie in thevery centre of five millions of people, with his filaments stretchingout and running through them, responsive to every little rumor orsuspicion of unsolved crime. Appreciation of Nature found no placeamong his many gifts, and his only change was when he turned his mindfrom the evil-doer of the town to track down his brother of thecountry.
I cannot be sure of the exact date, for some of my memoranda upon thematter have been mislaid, but it must have been towards the end ofthe first year during which Holmes and I shared chambers in BakerStreet. It was boisterous October weather, and we had both remainedindoors all day, I because I feared with my shaken health to face thekeen autumn wind, while he was deep in some of those abstrusechemical investigations which absorbed him utterly as long as he wasengaged upon them. Towards evening, however, the breaking of atest-tube brought his research to a premature ending, and he sprangup from his chair with an exclamation of impatience and a cloudedbrow.
"A day's work ruined, Watson," said he, striding across to thewindow. "Ha! The stars are out and he wind has fallen. What do yousay to a ramble through London?"
I was weary of our little sitting-room and gladly acquiesced. Forthree hours we strolled about together, watching the ever-changingkaleidoscope of life as it ebbs and flows through Fleet Street andthe Strand. His characteristic talk, with its keen observance ofdetail and subtle power of inference held me amused and enthralled.It was ten o'clock before we reached Baker Street again. A broughamwas waiting at our door.
"Hum! A doctor's--general practitioner, I perceive," said Holmes."Not been long in practice, but has had a good deal to do. Come toconsult us, I fancy! Lucky we came back!"
I was sufficiently conversant with Holmes's methods to be able tofollow his reasoning, and to see that the nature and state of thevarious medical instruments in the wicker basket which hung in thelamplight inside the brougham had given him the data for his swiftdeduction. The light in our window above showed that this late visitwas indeed intended for us. With some curiosity as to what could havesent a brother medico to us at such an hour, I followed Holmes intoour sanctum.
A pale, taper-faced man with sandy whiskers rose up from a chair bythe fire as we entered. His age may not have been more than three orfour and thirty, but his haggard expression and unhealthy hue told ofa life which has sapped his strength and robbed him of his youth. Hismanner was nervous and shy, like that of a sensitive gentleman, andthe thin white hand which he laid on the mantelpiece as he rose wasthat of an artist rather than of a surgeon. His dress was quiet andsombre--a black frock-coat, dark trousers, and a touch of color abouthis necktie.
"Good-evening, doctor," said Holmes, cheerily. "I am glad to see thatyou have only been waiting a very few minutes."
"You spoke to my coachman, then?"
"No, it was the candle on the side-table that told me. Pray resumeyour seat and let me know how I can serve you."
"My name is Doctor Percy Trevelyan," said our visitor, "and I live at403 Brook Street."
"Are you not the author of a monograph upon obscure nervous lesions?"I asked.
His pale cheeks flushed with pleasure at hearing that his work wasknown to me.
"I so seldom hear of the work that I thought it was quite dead," saidhe. "My publishers gave me a most discouraging account of its sale.You are yourself, I presume, a medical man?"
"A retired army surgeon."
"My own hobby has always been nervous disease. I should wish to makeit an absolute specialty, but, of course, a man must take what he canget at first. This, however, is beside the question, Mr. SherlockHolmes, and I quite appreciate how valuable your time is. The fact isthat a very singular train of events has occurred recently at myhouse in Brook Street, and to-night they came to such a head that Ifelt it was quite impossible for me to wait another hour beforeasking for your advice and assistance."
Sherlock Holmes sat down and lit his pipe. "You are very welcome toboth," said he. "Pray let me have a detailed account of what thecircumstances are which have disturbed you."
"One or two of them are so trivial," said Dr. Trevelyan, "that reallyI am almost ashamed to mention them. But the matter is soinexplicable, and the recent turn which it has taken is so elaborate,that I shall lay it all before you, and you shall judge what isessential and what is not.
"I am compelled, to begin with, to say something of my own collegecareer. I am a London University man, you know, and I am sure thatyou will not think that I am unduly singing my own praises if I saythat my student career was considered by my professors to be a verypromising one. After I had graduated I continued to devote myself toresearch, occupying a minor position in King's College Hospital, andI was fortunate enough to excite considerable interest by my researchinto the pathology of catalepsy, and finally to win the BrucePinkerton prize and medal by the monograph on nervous lesions towhich your friend has just alluded. I should not go too far if I wereto say that there was a general impression at that time that adistinguished career lay before me.
"But the one great stumbling-block lay in my want of capital. As youwill readily understand, a specialist who aims high is compelled tostart in one of a dozen streets in the Cavendish Square quarter, allof which entail enormous rents and furnishing expenses. Besides thispreliminary outlay, he must be prepared to keep himself for someyears, and to hire a presentable carriage and horse. To do this wasquite beyond my power, and I could only hope that by economy I mightin ten years' time save enough to enable me to put up my plate.Suddenly, however, an unexpected incident opened up quite a newprospect to me.
"This was a visit from a gentleman of the name of Blessington, whowas a complete stranger to me. He came up to my room one morning, andplunged into business in an instant.
"'You are the same Percy Trevelyan who has had so distinguished acareer and won a great prize lately?' said he.
"I bowed.
"'Answer me frankly,' he continued, 'for you will find it to yourinterest to do so. You have all the cleverness which makes asuccessful man. Have you the tact?'
"I could not help smiling at the abruptness of the question.
"'I trust that I have my share,' I said.
"'Any bad habits? Not drawn towards drink, eh?'
"'Really, sir!' I cried.
"'Quite right! That's all right! But I was bound to ask. With allthese qualities, why are you not in practice?'
"I shrugged my shoulders.
"'Come, come!' said he, in his bustling way. 'It's the old story.More in your brains than in your pocket, eh? What would you say if Iwere to start you in Brook Street?'
"I stared at him in astonishment.
"'Oh, it's for my sake, not for yours,' he cried.  'I'll be perfectlyfrank with you, and if it suits you it will suit me very well. I havea few thousands to invest, d'ye see, and I think I'll sink them inyou.'
"'But why?' I gasped.
"'Well, it's just like any other speculation, and safer than most.'
"'What am I to do, then?'
"'I'll tell you. I'll take the house, furnish it, pay the maids, andrun the whole place. All you have to do is just to wear out yourchair in the consulting-room. I'll let you have pocket-money andeverything. Then you hand over to me three quarters of what you earn,and you keep the other quarter for yourself.'
"This was the strange proposal, Mr. Holmes, with which the manBlessington approached me. I won't weary you with the account of howwe bargained and negotiated. It ended in my moving into the housenext Lady Day, and starting in practice on very much the sameconditions as he had suggested. He came himself to live with me inthe character of a resident patient. His heart was weak, it appears,and he needed constant medical supervision. He turned the two bestrooms of the first floor into a sitting-room and bedroom for himself.He was a man of singular habits, shunning company and very seldomgoing out. His life was irregular, but in one respect he wasregularity itself. Every evening, at the same hour, he walked intothe consulting-room, examined the books, put down five andthree-pence for every guinea that I had earned, and carried the restoff to the strong-box in his own room.
"I may say with confidence that he never had occasion to regret hisspeculation. From the first it was a success. A few good cases andthe reputation which I had won in the hospital brought me rapidly tothe front, and during the last few years I have made him a rich man.
"So much, Mr. Holmes, for my past history and my relations with Mr.Blessington. It only remains for me now to tell you what has occurredto bring me here to-night.
"Some weeks ago Mr. Blessington came down to me in, as it seemed tome, a state of considerable agitation. He spoke of some burglarywhich, he said, had been committed in the West End, and he appeared,I remember, to be quite unnecessarily excited about it, declaringthat a day should not pass before we should add stronger bolts to ourwindows and doors. For a week he continued to be in a peculiar stateof restlessness, peering continually out of the windows, and ceasingto take the short walk which had usually been the prelude to hisdinner. From his manner it struck me that he was in mortal dread ofsomething or somebody, but when I questioned him upon the point hebecame so offensive that I was compelled to drop the subject.Gradually, as time passed, his fears appeared to die away, and he hadrenewed his former habits, when a fresh event reduced him to thepitiable state of prostration in which he now lies.
"What happened was this. Two days ago I received the letter which Inow read to you. Neither address nor date is attached to it.
"'A Russian nobleman who is now resident in England,' it runs, 'wouldbe glad to avail himself of the professional assistance of Dr. PercyTrevelyan. He has been for some years a victim to cataleptic attacks,on which, as is well known, Dr. Trevelyan is an authority. Heproposes to call at about quarter past six to-morrow evening, if Dr.Trevelyan will make it convenient to be at home.'
"This letter interested me deeply, because the chief difficulty inthe study of catalepsy is the rareness of the disease. You maybelieve, than, that I was in my consulting-room when, at theappointed hour, the page showed in the patient.
He was an elderly man, thin, demure, and common-place--by no meansthe conception one forms of a Russian nobleman. I was much morestruck by the appearance of his companion. This was a tall young man,surprisingly handsome, with a dark, fierce face, and the limbs andchest of a Hercules. He had his hand under the other's arm as theyentered, and helped him to a chair with a tenderness which one wouldhardly have expected from his appearance.
"'You will excuse my coming in, doctor,' said he to me, speakingEnglish with a slight lisp. 'This is my father, and his health is amatter of the most overwhelming importance to me.'
"I was touched by this filial anxiety. 'You would, perhaps, care toremain during the consultation?' said I.
"'Not for the world,' he cried with a gesture of horror. 'It is morepainful to me than I can express. If I were to see my father in oneof these dreadful seizures I am convinced that I should never surviveit. My own nervous system is an exceptionally sensitive one. Withyour permission, I will remain in the waiting-room while you go intomy father's case.'
"To this, of course, I assented, and the young man withdrew. Thepatient and I then plunged into a discussion of his case, of which Itook exhaustive notes. He was not remarkable for intelligence, andhis answers were frequently obscure, which I attributed to hislimited acquaintance with our language. Suddenly, however, as I satwriting, he ceased to give any answer at all to my inquiries, and onmy turning towards him I was shocked to see that he was sitting boltupright in his chair, staring at me with a perfectly blank and rigidface. He was again in the grip of his mysterious malady.
"My first feeling, as I have just said, was one of pity and horror.My second, I fear, was rather one of professional satisfaction. Imade notes of my patient's pulse and temperature, tested the rigidityof his muscles, and examined his reflexes. There was nothing markedlyabnormal in any of these conditions, which harmonized with my formerexperiences. I had obtained good results in such cases by theinhalation of nitrite of amyl, and the present seemed an admirableopportunity of testing its virtues. The bottle was downstairs in mylaboratory, so leaving my patient seated in his chair, I ran down toget it. There was some little delay in finding it--five minutes, letus say--and then I returned. Imagine my amazement to find the roomempty and the patient gone.
"Of course, my first act was to run into the waiting-room. The sonhad gone also. The hall door had been closed, but not shut. My pagewho admits patients is a new boy and by no means quick. He waitsdownstairs, and runs up to show patients out when I ring theconsulting-room bell. He had heard nothing, and the affair remained acomplete mystery. Mr. Blessington came in from his walk shortlyafterwards, but I did not say anything to him upon the subject, for,to tell the truth, I have got in the way of late of holding as littlecommunication with him as possible.
"Well, I never thought that I should see anything more of the Russianand his son, so you can imagine my amazement when, at the very samehour this evening, they both came marching into my consulting-room,just as they had done before.
"'I feel that I owe you a great many apologies for my abruptdeparture yesterday, doctor,' said my patient.
"'I confess that I was very much surprised at it,' said I.
"'Well, the fact is,' he remarked, 'that when I recover from theseattacks my mind is always very clouded as to all that has gonebefore. I woke up in a strange room, as it seemed to me, and made myway out into the street in a sort of dazed way when you were absent.'
"'And I,' said the son, 'seeing my father pass the door of thewaiting-room, naturally thought that the consultation had come to anend. It was not until we had reached home that I began to realize thetrue state of affairs.'
"'Well,' said I, laughing, 'there is no harm done except that youpuzzled me terribly; so if you, sir, would kindly step into thewaiting-room I shall be happy to continue our consultation which wasbrought to so abrupt an ending.'
"For half an hour or so I discussed that old gentleman's symptomswith him, and then, having prescribed for him, I saw him go off uponthe arm of his son.
"I have told you that Mr. Blessington generally chose this hour ofthe day for his exercise. He came in shortly afterwards and passedupstairs. An instant later I heard him running down, and he burstinto my consulting-room like a man who is mad with panic.
"'Who has been in my room?' he cried.
"'No one,' said I.
"'It's a lie!' He yelled. 'Come up and look!'
"I passed over the grossness of his language, as he seemed half outof his mind with fear. When I went upstairs with him he pointed toseveral footprints upon the light carpet.
"'D'you mean to say those are mine?' he cried.
"They were certainly very much larger than any which he could havemade, and were evidently quite fresh. It rained hard this afternoon,as you know, and my patients were the only people who called. It musthave been the case, then, that the man in the waiting-room had, forsome unknown reason, while I was busy with the other, ascended to theroom of my resident patient. Nothing has been touched or taken, butthere were the footprints to prove that the intrusion was anundoubted fact.
"Mr. Blessington seemed more excited over the matter than I shouldhave thought possible, though of course it was enough to disturbanybody's peace of mind. He actually sat crying in an arm-chair, andI could hardly get him to speak coherently. It was his suggestionthat I should come round to you, and of course I at once saw thepropriety of it, for certainly the incident is a very singular one,though he appears to completely overrate its importance. If you wouldonly come back with me in my brougham, you would at least be able tosoothe him, though I can hardly hope that you will be able to explainthis remarkable occurrence."
Sherlock Holmes had listened to this long narrative with anintentness which showed me that his interest was keenly aroused. Hisface was as impassive as ever, but his lids had drooped more heavilyover his eyes, and his smoke had curled up more thickly from his pipeto emphasize each curious episode in the doctor's tale. As ourvisitor concluded, Holmes sprang up without a word, handed me my hat,picked his own from the table, and followed Dr. Trevelyan to thedoor. Within a quarter of an hour we had been dropped at the door ofthe physician's residence in Brook Street, one of those sombre,flat-faced houses which one associates with a West-End practice. Asmall page admitted us, and we began at once to ascend the broad,well-carpeted stair.
But a singular interruption brought us to a standstill. The light atthe top was suddenly whisked out, and from the darkness came a reedy,quivering voice.
"I have a pistol," it cried. "I give you my word that I'll fire ifyou come any nearer."
"This really grows outrageous, Mr. Blessington," cried Dr. Trevelyan.
"Oh, then it is you, doctor," said the voice, with a great heave ofrelief. "But those other gentlemen, are they what they pretend tobe?"
We were conscious of a long scrutiny out of the darkness.
"Yes, yes, it's all right," said the voice at last. "You can come up,and I am sorry if my precautions have annoyed you."
He relit the stair gas as he spoke, and we saw before us asingular-looking man, whose appearance, as well as his voice,testified to his jangled nerves. He was very fat, but had apparentlyat some time been much fatter, so that the skin hung about his facein loose pouches, like the cheeks of a blood-hound. He was of asickly color, and his thin, sandy hair seemed to bristle up with theintensity of his emotion. In his hand he held a pistol, but he thrustit into his pocket as we advanced.
"Good-evening, Mr. Holmes," said he. "I am sure I am very muchobliged to you for coming round. No one ever needed your advice morethan I do. I suppose that Dr. Trevelyan has told you of this mostunwarrantable intrusion into my rooms."
"Quite so," said Holmes. "Who are these two men Mr. Blessington, andwhy do they wish to molest you?"
"Well, well," said the resident patient, in a nervous fashion, "ofcourse it is hard to say that. You can hardly expect me to answerthat, Mr. Holmes."
"Do you mean that you don't know?"
"Come in here, if you please. Just have the kindness to step inhere."
He led the way into his bedroom, which was large and comfortablyfurnished.
"You see that," said he, pointing to a big black box at the end ofhis bed. "I have never been a very rich man, Mr. Holmes--never madebut one investment in my life, as Dr. Trevelyan would tell you. But Idon't believe in bankers. I would never trust a banker, Mr. Holmes.Between ourselves, what little I have is in that box, so you canunderstand what it means to me when unknown people force themselvesinto my rooms."
Holmes looked at Blessington in his questioning way and shook hishead.
"I cannot possibly advise you if you try to deceive me," said he.
"But I have told you everything."
Holmes turned on his heel with a gesture of disgust. "Good-night, Dr.Trevelyan," said he.
"And no advice for me?" cried Blessington, in a breaking voice.
"My advice to your, sir, is to speak the truth."
A minute later we were in the street and walking for home. We hadcrossed Oxford Street and were half way down Harley Street before Icould get a word from my companion.
"Sorry to bring you out on such a fool's errand, Watson," he said atlast. "It is an interesting case, too, at the bottom of it."
"I can make little of it," I confessed.
"Well, it is quite evident that there are two men--more, perhaps, butat least two--who are determined for some reason to get at thisfellow Blessington. I have no doubt in my mind that both on the firstand on the second occasion that young man penetrated to Blessington'sroom, while his confederate, by an ingenious device, kept the doctorfrom interfering."
"And the catalepsy?"
"A fraudulent imitation, Watson, though I should hardly dare to hintas much to our specialist. It is a very easy complaint to imitate. Ihave done it myself."
"And then?"
"By the purest chance Blessington was out on each occasion. Theirreason for choosing so unusual an hour for a consultation wasobviously to insure that there should be no other patient in thewaiting-room. It just happened, however, that this hour coincidedwith Blessington's constitutional, which seems to show that they werenot very well acquainted with his daily routine. Of course, if theyhad been merely after plunder they would at least have made someattempt to search for it. Besides, I can read in a man's eye when itis his own skin that he is frightened for. It is inconceivable thatthis fellow could have made two such vindictive enemies as theseappear to be without knowing of it. I hold it, therefore, to becertain that he does know who these men are, and that for reasons ofhis own he suppresses it. It is just possible that to-morrow may findhim in a more communicative mood."
"Is there not one alternative," I suggested, "grotesquely improbably,no doubt, but still just conceivable? Might the whole story of thecataleptic Russian and his son be a concoction of Dr. Trevelyan's,who has, for his own purposes, been in Blessington's rooms?"
I saw in the gaslight that Holmes wore an amused smile at thisbrilliant departure of mine.
"My dear fellow," said he, "it was one of the first solutions whichoccurred to me, but I was soon able to corroborate the doctor's tale.This young man has left prints upon the stair-carpet which made itquite superfluous for me to ask to see those which he had made in theroom. When I tell you that his shoes were square-toed instead ofbeing pointed like Blessington's, and were quite an inch and a thirdlonger than the doctor's, you will acknowledge that there can be nodoubt as to his individuality. But we may sleep on it now, for Ishall be surprised if we do not hear something further from BrookStreet in the morning."
Sherlock Holmes's prophecy was soon fulfilled, and in a dramaticfashion. At half-past seven next morning, in the first glimmer ofdaylight, I found him standing by my bedside in his dressing-gown.
"There's a brougham waiting for us, Watson," said he.
"What's the matter, then?"
"The Brook Street business."
"Any fresh news?"
"Tragic, but ambiguous," said he, pulling up the blind.  "Look atthis--a sheet from a note-book, with 'For God's sake come at once--P.T.,' scrawled upon it in pencil. Our friend, the doctor, was hard putto it when he wrote this. Come along, my dear fellow, for it's anurgent call."
In a quarter of an hour or so we were back at the physician's house. He came running out to meet us with a face of horror.
"Oh, such a business!" he cried, with his hands to his temples.
"What then?"
"Blessington has committed suicide!"
Holmes whistled.
"Yes, he hanged himself during the night."
We had entered, and the doctor had preceded us into what wasevidently his waiting-room.
"I really hardly know what I am doing," he cried. "The police arealready upstairs. It has shaken me most dreadfully."
"When did you find it out?"
"He has a cup of tea taken in to him early every morning. When themaid entered, about seven, there the unfortunate fellow was hangingin the middle of the room. He had tied his cord to the hook on whichthe heavy lamp used to hang, and he had jumped off from the top ofthe very box that he showed us yesterday."
Holmes stood for a moment in deep thought.
"With your permission," said he at last, "I should like to goupstairs and look into the matter."
We both ascended, followed by the doctor.
It was a dreadful sight which met us as we entered the bedroom door.I have spoken of the impression of flabbiness which this manBlessington conveyed. As he dangled from the hook it was exaggeratedand intensified until he was scarce human in his appearance. The neckwas drawn out like a plucked chicken's, making the rest of him seemthe more obese and unnatural by the contrast. He was clad only in hislong night-dress, and his swollen ankles and ungainly feet protrudedstarkly from beneath it. Beside him stood a smart-lookingpolice-inspector, who was taking notes in a pocket-book.
"Ah, Mr. Holmes," said he, heartily, as my friend entered, "I amdelighted to see you."
"Good-morning, Lanner," answered Holmes; "you won't think me anintruder, I am sure. Have you heard of the events which led up tothis affair?"
"Yes, I heard something of them."
"Have you formed any opinion?"
"As far as I can see, the man has been driven out of his senses byfright. The bed has been well slept in, you see. There's hisimpression deep enough. It's about five in the morning, you know,that suicides are most common. That would be about his time forhanging himself. It seems to have been a very deliberate affair."
"I should say that he has been dead about three hours, judging by therigidity of the muscles," said I.
"Noticed anything peculiar about the room?" asked Holmes.
"Found a screw-driver and some screws on the wash-hand stand. Seemsto have smoked heavily during the night, too. Here are fourcigar-ends that I picked out of the fireplace."
"Hum!" said Holmes, "have you got his cigar-holder?"
"No, I have seen none."
"His cigar-case, then?"
"Yes, it was in his coat-pocket."
Holmes opened it and smelled the single cigar which it contained.
"Oh, this is an Havana, and these others are cigars of the peculiarsort which are imported by the Dutch from their East Indian colonies.They are usually wrapped in straw, you know, and are thinner fortheir length than any other brand." He picked up the four ends andexamined them with his pocket-lens.
"Two of these have been smoked from a holder and two without," saidhe. "Two have been cut by a not very sharp knife, and two have hadthe ends bitten off by a set of excellent teeth. This is no suicide,Mr. Lanner. It is a very deeply planned and cold-blooded murder."
"Impossible!" cried the inspector.
"And why?"
"Why should any one murder a man in so clumsy a fashion as by hanginghim?"
"That is what we have to find out."
"How could they get in?"
"Through the front door."
"It was barred in the morning."
"Then it was barred after them."
"How do you know?"
"I saw their traces. Excuse me a moment, and I may be able to giveyou some further information about it."
He went over to the door, and turning the lock he examined it in hismethodical way. Then he took out the key, which was on the inside,and inspected that also. The bed, the carpet, the chairs themantelpiece, the dead body, and the rope were each in turn examined,until at last he professed himself satisfied, and with my aid andthat of the inspector cut down the wretched object and laid itreverently under a sheet.
"How about this rope?" he asked.
"It is cut off this," said Dr. Trevelyan, drawing a large coil fromunder the bed. "He was morbidly nervous of fire, and always kept thisbeside him, so that he might escape by the window in case the stairswere burning."
"That must have saved them trouble," said Holmes, thoughtfully. "Yes,the actual facts are very plain, and I shall be surprised if by theafternoon I cannot give you the reasons for them as well. I will takethis photograph of Blessington, which I see upon the mantelpiece, asit may help me in my inquiries."
"But you have told us nothing!" cried the doctor.
"Oh, there can be no doubt as to the sequence of events," saidHolmes. "There were three of them in it: the young man, the old man,and a third, to whose identity I have no clue. The first two, I needhardly remark, are the same who masqueraded as the Russian count andhis son, so we can give a very full description of them. They wereadmitted by a confederate inside the house. If I might offer you aword of advice, Inspector, it would be to arrest the page, who, as Iunderstand, has only recently come into your service, Doctor."
"The young imp cannot be found," said Dr. Trevelyan; "the maid andthe cook have just been searching for him."
Holmes shrugged his shoulders.
"He has played a not unimportant part in this drama," said he. "Thethree men having ascended the stairs, which they did on tiptoe, theelder man first, the younger man second, and the unknown man in therear--"
"My dear Holmes!" I ejaculated.
"Oh, there could be no question as to the superimposing of thefootmarks. I had the advantage of learning which was which lastnight. They ascended, then, to Mr. Blessington's room, the door ofwhich they found to be locked. With the help of a wire, however, theyforced round the key. Even without the lens you will perceive, by thescratches on this ward, where the pressure was applied.
"On entering the room their first proceeding must have been to gagMr. Blessington. He may have been asleep, or he may have been soparalyzed with terror as to have been unable to cry out. These wallsare thick, and it is conceivable that his shriek, if he had time toutter one, was unheard.
"Having secured him, it is evident to me that a consultation of somesort was held. Probably it was something in the nature of a judicialproceeding. It must have lasted for some time, for it was then thatthese cigars were smoked. The older man sat in that wicker chair; itwas he who used the cigar-holder. The younger man sat over yonder; heknocked his ash off against the chest of drawers. The third fellowpaced up and down. Blessington, I think, sat upright in the bed, butof that I cannot be absolutely certain.
"Well, it ended by their taking Blessington and hanging him. Thematter was so prearranged that it is my belief that they brought withthem some sort of block or pulley which might serve as a gallows.That screw-driver and those screws were, as I conceive, for fixing itup. Seeing the hook, however they naturally saved themselves thetrouble. Having finished their work they made off, and the door wasbarred behind them by their confederate."
We had all listened with the deepest interest to this sketch of thenight's doings, which Holmes had deduced from signs so subtle andminute that, even when he had pointed them out to us, we couldscarcely follow him in his reasoning. The inspector hurried away onthe instant to make inquiries about the page, while Holmes and Ireturned to Baker Street for breakfast.
"I'll be back by three," said he, when we had finished our meal."Both the inspector and the doctor will meet me here at that hour,and I hope by that time to have cleared up any little obscurity whichthe case may still present."
Our visitors arrived at the appointed time, but it was a quarter tofour before my friend put in an appearance. From his expression as heentered, however, I could see that all had gone well with him.
"Any news, Inspector?"
"We have got the boy, sir."
"Excellent, and I have got the men."
"You have got them!" we cried, all three.
"Well, at least I have got their identity. This so-called Blessingtonis, as I expected, well known at headquarters, and so are hisassailants. Their names are Biddle, Hayward, and Moffat."
"The Worthingdon bank gang," cried the inspector.
"Precisely," said Holmes.
"Then Blessington must have been Sutton."
"Exactly," said Holmes.
"Why, that makes it as clear as crystal," said the inspector.
But Trevelyan and I looked at each other in bewilderment.
"You must surely remember the great Worthingdon bank business," saidHolmes. "Five men were in it--these four and a fifth calledCartwright. Tobin, the care-taker, was murdered, and the thieves gotaway with seven thousand pounds. This was in 1875. They were all fivearrested, but the evidence against them was by no means conclusive.This Blessington or Sutton, who was the worst of the gang, turnedinformer. On his evidence Cartwright was hanged and the other threegot fifteen years apiece. When they got out the other day, which wassome years before their full term, they set themselves, as youperceive, to hunt down the traitor and to avenge the death of theircomrade upon him. Twice they tried to get at him and failed; a thirdtime, you see, it came off. Is there anything further which I canexplain, Dr. Trevelyan?"
"I think you have made it all remarkable clear," said the doctor. "Nodoubt the day on which he was perturbed was the day when he had seenof their release in the newspapers."
"Quite so. His talk about a burglary was the merest blind."
"But why could he not tell you this?"
"Well, my dear sir, knowing the vindictive character of his oldassociates, he was trying to hide his own identity from everybody aslong as he could. His secret was a shameful one, and he could notbring himself to divulge it. However, wretch as he was, he was stillliving under the shield of British law, and I have no doubt,Inspector, that you will see that, though that shield may fail toguard, the sword of justice is still there to avenge."
Such were the singular circumstances in connection with the ResidentPatient and the Brook Street Doctor. From that night nothing has beenseen of the three murderers by the police, and it is surmised atScotland Yard that they were among the passengers of the ill-fatedsteamer Norah Creina, which was lost some years ago with all handsupon the Portuguese coast, some leagues to the north of Oporto. Theproceedings against the page broke down for want of evidence, and theBrook Street Mystery, as it was called, has never until now beenfully dealt with in any public print.





                         THE GREEK INTERPRETER
During my long and intimate acquaintance with Mr. Sherlock Holmes Ihad never heard him refer to his relations, and hardly ever to hisown early life.  This reticence upon his part had increased thesomewhat inhuman effect which he produced upon me, until sometimes Ifound myself regarding him as an isolated phenomenon, a brain withouta heart, as deficient in human sympathy as he was pre-eminent inintelligence.  His aversion to women and his disinclination to formnew friendships were both typical of his unemotional character, butnot more so than his complete suppression of every reference to hisown people.  I had come to believe that he was an orphan with norelatives living, but one day, to my very great surprise, he began totalk to me about his brother.
It was after tea on a summer evening, and the conversation, which hadroamed in a desultory, spasmodic fashion from golf clubs to thecauses of the change in the obliquity of the ecliptic, came round atlast to the question of atavism and hereditary aptitudes.  The pointunder discussion was, how far any singular gift in an individual wasdue to his ancestry and how far to his own early training.
"In your own case," said I, "from all that you have told me, it seemsobvious that your faculty of observation and your peculiar facilityfor deduction are due to your own systematic training."
"To some extent," he answered, thoughtfully.  "My ancestors werecountry squires, who appear to have led much the same life as isnatural to their class.  But, none the less, my turn that way is inmy veins, and may have come with my grandmother, who was the sisterof Vernet, the French artist.  Art in the blood is liable to take thestrangest forms."
"But how do you know that it is hereditary?"
"Because my brother Mycroft possesses it in a larger degree than Ido."
This was news to me indeed.  If there were another man with suchsingular powers in England, how was it that neither police nor publichad heard of him?  I put the question, with a hint that it was mycompanion's modesty which made him acknowledge his brother as hissuperior.  Holmes laughed at my suggestion.
"My dear Watson," said he, "I cannot agree with those who rankmodesty among the virtues.  To the logician all things should be seenexactly as they are, and to underestimate one's self is as much adeparture from truth as to exaggerate one's own powers.  When I say,therefore, that Mycroft has better powers of observation than I, youmay take it that I am speaking the exact and literal truth."
"Is he your junior?"
"Seven years my senior."
"How comes it that he is unknown?"
"Oh, he is very well known in his own circle."
"Where, then?"
"Well, in the Diogenes Club, for example."
I had never heard of the institution, and my face must haveproclaimed as much, for Sherlock Holmes pulled out his watch.
"The Diogenes Club is the queerest club in London, and Mycroft one ofthe queerest men.  He's always there from quarter to five to twentyto eight.  It's six now, so if you care for a stroll this beautifulevening I shall be very happy to introduce you to two curiosities."
Five minutes later we were in the street, walking towards Regent'sCircus.
"You wonder," said my companion, "why it is that Mycroft does not usehis powers for detective work.  He is incapable of it."
"But I thought you said--"
"I said that he was my superior in observation and deduction.  If theart of the detective began and ended in reasoning from an arm-chair,my brother would be the greatest criminal agent that ever lived.  Buthe has no ambition and no energy.  He will not even go out of his wayto verify his own solution, and would rather be considered wrong thantake the trouble to prove himself right.  Again and again I havetaken a problem to him, and have received an explanation which hasafterwards proved to be the correct one.  And yet he was absolutelyincapable of working out the practical points which must be gone intobefore a case could be laid before a judge or jury."
"It is not his profession, then?"
"By no means.  What is to me a means of livelihood is to him themerest hobby of a dilettante.  He has an extraordinary faculty forfigures, and audits the books in some of the government departments. Mycroft lodges in Pall Mall, and he walks round the corner intoWhitehall every morning and back every evening.  From year's end toyear's end he takes no other exercise, and is seen nowhere else,except only in the Diogenes Club, which is just opposite his rooms."
"I cannot recall the name."
"Very likely not.  There are many men in London, you know, who, somefrom shyness, some from misanthropy, have no wish for the company oftheir fellows.  Yet they are not averse to comfortable chairs and thelatest periodicals.  It is for the convenience of these that theDiogenes Club was started, and it now contains the most unsociableand unclubable men in town.  No member is permitted to take the leastnotice of any other one.  Save in the Stranger's Room, no talking is,under any circumstances, allowed, and three offences, if brought tothe notice of the committee, render the talker liable to expulsion. My brother was one of the founders, and I have myself found it a verysoothing atmosphere."
We had reached Pall Mall as we talked, and were walking down it fromthe St. James's end.  Sherlock Holmes stopped at a door some littledistance from the Carlton, and, cautioning me not to speak, he ledthe way into the hall.  Through the glass paneling I caught a glimpseof a large and luxurious room, in which a considerable number of menwere sitting about and reading papers, each in his own little nook. Holmes showed me into a small chamber which looked out into PallMall, and then, leaving me for a minute, he came back with acompanion whom I knew could only be his brother.
Mycroft Holmes was a much larger and stouter man than Sherlock.  Hisbody was absolutely corpulent, but his face, though massive, hadpreserved something of the sharpness of expression which was soremarkable in that of his brother.  His eyes, which were of apeculiarly light, watery gray, seemed to always retain that far-away,introspective look which I had only observed in Sherlock's when hewas exerting his full powers.
"I am glad to meet you, sir," said he, putting out a broad, fat handlike the flipper of a seal.  "I hear of Sherlock everywhere since youbecame his chronicler.  By the way, Sherlock, I expected to see youround last week, to consult me over that Manor House case.  I thoughtyou might be a little out of your depth."
"No, I solved it," said my friend, smiling.
"It was Adams, of course."
"Yes, it was Adams."
"I was sure of it from the first."  The two sat down together in thebow-window of the club.  "To any one who wishes to study mankind thisis the spot," said Mycroft.  "Look at the magnificent types!  Look atthese two men who are coming towards us, for example."
"The billiard-marker and the other?"
"Precisely.  What do you make of the other?"
The two men had stopped opposite the window.  Some chalk marks overthe waistcoat pocket were the only signs of billiards which I couldsee in one of them.  The other was a very small, dark fellow, withhis hat pushed back and several packages under his arm.
"An old soldier, I perceive," said Sherlock.
"And very recently discharged," remarked the brother.
"Served in India, I see."
"And a non-commissioned officer."
"Royal Artillery, I fancy," said Sherlock.
"And a widower."
"But with a child."
"Children, my dear boy, children."
"Come," said I, laughing, "this is a little too much."
"Surely," answered Holmes, "it is not hard to say that a man withthat bearing, expression of authority, and sunbaked skin, is asoldier, is more than a private, and is not long from India."
"That he has not left the service long is shown by his still wearinghis 'ammunition boots', as they are called," observed Mycroft.
"He had not the cavalry stride, yet he wore his hat on one side, asis shown by the lighter skin of that side of his brow.  His weight isagainst his being a sapper.  He is in the artillery."
"Then, of course, his complete mourning shows that he has lost someone very dear.  The fact that he is doing his own shopping looks asthough it were his wife.  He has been buying things for children, youperceive.  There is a rattle, which shows that one of them is veryyoung.  The wife probably died in childbed.  The fact that he has apicture-book under his arm shows that there is another child to bethought of."
I began to understand what my friend meant when he said that hisbrother possessed even keener faculties that he did himself.  Heglanced across at me and smiled.  Mycroft took snuff from atortoise-shell box, and brushed away the wandering grains from hiscoat front with a large, red silk handkerchief.
"By the way, Sherlock," said he, "I have had something quite afteryour own heart--a most singular problem--submitted to my judgment.  Ireally had not the energy to follow it up save in a very incompletefashion, but it gave me a basis for some pleasing speculation.  Ifyou would care to hear the facts--"
"My dear Mycroft, I should be delighted."
The brother scribbled a note upon a leaf of his pocket-book, and,ringing the bell, he handed it to the waiter.
"I have asked Mr. Melas to step across," said he.  "He lodges on thefloor above me, and I have some slight acquaintance with him, whichled him to come to me in his perplexity.  Mr. Melas is a Greek byextraction, as I understand, and he is a remarkable linguist.  Heearns his living partly as interpreter in the law courts and partlyby acting as guide to any wealthy Orientals who may visit theNorthumberland Avenue hotels.  I think I will leave him to tell hisvery remarkable experience in his own fashion."
A few minutes later we were joined by a short, stout man whose oliveface and coal-black hair proclaimed his Southern origin, though hisspeech was that of an educated Englishman.  He shook hands eagerlywith Sherlock Holmes, and his dark eyes sparkled with pleasure whenhe understood that the specialist was anxious to hear his story.
"I do not believe that the police credit me--on my word, I do not,"said he in a wailing voice.  "Just because they have never heard ofit before, they think that such a thing cannot be.  But I know that Ishall never be easy in my mind until I know what has become of mypoor man with the sticking-plaster upon his face."
"I am all attention," said Sherlock Holmes.
"This is Wednesday evening," said Mr. Melas.  "Well then, it wasMonday night--only two days ago, you understand--that all thishappened.  I am an interpreter, as perhaps my neighbor there has toldyou.  I interpret all languages--or nearly all--but as I am a Greekby birth and with a Grecian name, it is with that particular tonguethat I am principally associated.  For many years I have been thechief Greek interpreter in London, and my name is very well known inthe hotels.
It happens not unfrequently that I am sent for at strange hours byforeigners who get into difficulties, or by travelers who arrive lateand wish my services.  I was not surprised, therefore, on Mondaynight when a Mr. Latimer, a very fashionably dressed young man, cameup to my rooms and asked me to accompany him in a cab which waswaiting at the door.  A Greek friend had come to see him uponbusiness, he said, and as he could speak nothing but his own tongue,the services of an interpreter were indispensable.  He gave me tounderstand that his house was some little distance off, inKensington, and he seemed to be in a great hurry, bustling me rapidlyinto the cab when we had descended to the street.
"I say into the cab, but I soon became doubtful as to whether it wasnot a carriage in which I found myself.  It was certainly more roomythan the ordinary four-wheeled disgrace to London, and the fittings,though frayed, were of rich quality.  Mr. Latimer seated himselfopposite to me and we started off through Charing Cross and up theShaftesbury Avenue.  We had come out upon Oxford Street and I hadventured some remark as to this being a roundabout way to Kensington,when my words were arrested by the extraordinary conduct of mycompanion.
"He began by drawing a most formidable-looking bludgeon loaded withlead from his pocket, and switching it backward and forward severaltimes, as if to test its weight and strength.  Then he placed itwithout a word upon the seat beside him.  Having done this, he drewup the windows on each side, and I found to my astonishment that theywere covered with paper so as to prevent my seeing through them.
"'I am sorry to cut off your view, Mr. Melas,' said he.  'The fact isthat I have no intention that you should see what the place is towhich we are driving.  It might possibly be inconvenient to me if youcould find your way there again.'
"As you can imagine, I was utterly taken aback by such an address. My companion was a powerful, broad-shouldered young fellow, and,apart from the weapon, I should not have had the slightest chance ina struggle with him.
"'This is very extraordinary conduct, Mr. Latimer,' I stammered. 'You must be aware that what you are doing is quite illegal.'
"'It is somewhat of a liberty, no doubt,' said he, 'but we'll make itup to you.  I must warn you, however, Mr. Melas, that if at any timeto-night you attempt to raise an alarm or do anything which isagainst my interests, you will find it a very serious thing.  I begyou to remember that no one knows where you are, and that, whetheryou are in this carriage or in my house, you are equally in mypower.'
"His words were quiet, but he had a rasping way of saying them whichwas very menacing.  I sat in silence wondering what on earth could behis reason for kidnapping me in this extraordinary fashion.  Whateverit might be, it was perfectly clear that there was no possible use inmy resisting, and that I could only wait to see what might befall.
"For nearly two hours we drove without my having the least clue as towhere we were going.  Sometimes the rattle of the stones told of apaved causeway, and at others our smooth, silent course suggestedasphalt; but, save by this variation in sound, there was nothing atall which could in the remotest way help me to form a guess as towhere we were.  The paper over each window was impenetrable to light,and a blue curtain was drawn across the glass work in front.  It wasa quarter-past seven when we left Pall Mall, and my watch showed methat it was ten minutes to nine when we at last came to a standstill. My companion let down the window, and I caught a glimpse of a low,arched doorway with a lamp burning above it.  As I was hurried fromthe carriage it swung open, and I found myself inside the house, witha vague impression of a lawn and trees on each side of me as Ientered.  Whether these were private grounds, however, or bona-fidecountry was more than I could possibly venture to say.
"There was a colored gas-lamp inside which was turned so low that Icould see little save that the hall was of some size and hung withpictures.  In the dim light I could make out that the person who hadopened the door was a small, mean-looking, middle-aged man withrounded shoulders.  As he turned towards us the glint of the lightshowed me that he was wearing glasses.
"'Is this Mr. Melas, Harold?' said he.
"'Yes.'
"'Well done, well done!  No ill-will, Mr. Melas, I hope, but we couldnot get on without you.  If you deal fair with us you'll not regretit, but if you try any tricks, God help you!'  He spoke in a nervous,jerky fashion, and with little giggling laughs in between, butsomehow he impressed me with fear more than the other.
"'What do you want with me?' I asked.
"'Only to ask a few questions of a Greek gentleman who is visitingus, and to let us have the answers.  But say no more than you aretold to say, or--' here came the nervous giggle again--'you hadbetter never have been born.'
"As he spoke he opened a door and showed the way into a room whichappeared to be very richly furnished, but again the only light wasafforded by a single lamp half-turned down.  The chamber wascertainly large, and the way in which my feet sank into the carpet asI stepped across it told me of its richness.  I caught glimpses ofvelvet chairs, a high white marble mantel-piece, and what seemed tobe a suit of Japanese armor at one side of it.  There was a chairjust under the lamp, and the elderly man motioned that I should sitin it.  The younger had left us, but he suddenly returned throughanother door, leading with him a gentleman clad in some sort of loosedressing-gown who moved slowly towards us.  As he came into thecircle of dim light which enabled me to see him more clearly I wasthrilled with horror at his appearance.  He was deadly pale andterribly emaciated, with the protruding, brilliant eyes of a manwhose spirit was greater than his strength.  But what shocked me morethan any signs of physical weakness was that his face was grotesquelycriss-crossed with sticking-plaster, and that one large pad of it wasfastened over his mouth.
"'Have you the slate, Harold?' cried the older man, as this strangebeing fell rather than sat down into a chair.  'Are his hands loose? Now, then, give him the pencil.  You are to ask the questions, Mr.Melas, and he will write the answers.  Ask him first of all whetherhe is prepared to sign the papers?'
"The man's eyes flashed fire.
"'Never!' he wrote in Greek upon the slate.
"'On no condition?' I asked, at the bidding of our tyrant.
"'Only if I see her married in my presence by a Greek priest whom Iknow.'
"The man giggled in his venomous way.
"'You know what awaits you, then?'
"'I care nothing for myself.'
"These are samples of the questions and answers which made up ourstrange half-spoken, half-written conversation.  Again and again Ihad to ask him whether he would give in and sign the documents. Again and again I had the same indignant reply.  But soon a happythought came to me.  I took to adding on little sentences of my ownto each question, innocent ones at first, to test whether either ofour companions knew anything of the matter, and then, as I found thatthey showed no signs I played a more dangerous game.  Ourconversation ran something like this:
"'You can do no good by this obstinacy. Who are you?'
"'I care not. I am a stranger in London.'
"'Your fate will be upon your own head. How long have you been here?'
"'Let it be so. Three weeks.'
"'The property can never be yours. What ails you?'
"'It shall not go to villains. They are starving me.'
"'You shall go free if you sign. What house is this?'
"'I will never sign. I do not know.'
"'You are not doing her any service. What is your name?'
"'Let me hear her say so. Kratides.'
"'You shall see her if you sign. Where are you from?'
"'Then I shall never see her. Athens.'
"Another five minutes, Mr. Holmes, and I should have wormed out thewhole story under their very noses.  My very next question might havecleared the matter up, but at that instant the door opened and awoman stepped into the room.  I could not see her clearly enough toknow more than that she was tall and graceful, with black hair, andclad in some sort of loose white gown.
"'Harold,' said she, speaking English with a broken accent.  'I couldnot stay away longer.  It is so lonely up there with only--Oh, myGod, it is Paul!'
"These last words were in Greek, and at the same instant the man witha convulsive effort tore the plaster from his lips, and screaming out'Sophy!  Sophy!' rushed into the woman's arms.  Their embrace was butfor an instant, however, for the younger man seized the woman andpushed her out of the room, while the elder easily overpowered hisemaciated victim, and dragged him away through the other door.  For amoment I was left alone in the room, and I sprang to my feet withsome vague idea that I might in some way get a clue to what thishouse was in which I found myself.  Fortunately, however, I took nosteps, for looking up I saw that the older man was standing in thedoor-way with his eyes fixed upon me.
"'That will do, Mr. Melas,' said he.  'You perceive that we havetaken you into our confidence over some very private business.  Weshould not have troubled you, only that our friend who speaks Greekand who began these negotiations has been forced to return to theEast.  It was quite necessary for us to find some one to take hisplace, and we were fortunate in hearing of your powers.'
"I bowed.
"'There are five sovereigns here,' said he, walking up to me, 'whichwill, I hope, be a sufficient fee.  But remember,' he added, tappingme lightly on the chest and giggling, 'if you speak to a human soulabout this--one human soul, mind--well, may God have mercy upon yoursoul!'
"I cannot tell you the loathing and horror with which thisinsignificant-looking man inspired me.  I could see him better now asthe lamp-light shone upon him.  His features were peaky and sallow,and his little pointed beard was thready and ill-nourished.  Hepushed his face forward as he spoke and his lips and eyelids werecontinually twitching like a man with St. Vitus's dance.  I could nothelp thinking that his strange, catchy little laugh was also asymptom of some nervous malady.  The terror of his face lay in hiseyes, however, steel gray, and glistening coldly with a malignant,inexorable cruelty in their depths.
"'We shall know if you speak of this,' said he.  'We have our ownmeans of information.  Now you will find the carriage waiting, and myfriend will see you on your way.'
"I was hurried through the hall and into the vehicle, again obtainingthat momentary glimpse of trees and a garden.  Mr. Latimer followedclosely at my heels, and took his place opposite to me without aword.  In silence we again drove for an interminable distance withthe windows raised, until at last, just after midnight, the carriagepulled up.
"'You will get down here, Mr. Melas,' said my companion.  'I am sorryto leave you so far from your house, but there is no alternative. Any attempt upon your part to follow the carriage can only end ininjury to yourself.'
"He opened the door as he spoke, and I had hardly time to spring outwhen the coachman lashed the horse and the carriage rattled away.  Ilooked around me in astonishment.  I was on some sort of a heathycommon mottled over with dark clumps of furze-bushes.  Far awaystretched a line of houses, with a light here and there in the upperwindows.  On the other side I saw the red signal-lamps of a railway.
"The carriage which had brought me was already out of sight.  I stoodgazing round and wondering where on earth I might be, when I saw someone coming towards me in the darkness.  As he came up to me I madeout that he was a railway porter.
"'Can you tell me what place this is?' I asked.
"'Wandsworth Common,' said he.
"'Can I get a train into town?'
"'If you walk on a mile or so to Clapham Junction,' said he, 'you'lljust be in time for the last to Victoria.'
"So that was the end of my adventure, Mr. Holmes.  I do not knowwhere I was, nor whom I spoke with, nor anything save what I havetold you.  But I know that there is foul play going on, and I want tohelp that unhappy man if I can.  I told the whole story to Mr.Mycroft Holmes next morning, and subsequently to the police."
We all sat in silence for some little time after listening to thisextraordinary narrative.  Then Sherlock looked across at his brother.
"Any steps?" he asked.
Mycroft picked up the Daily News, which was lying on the side-table.
"Anybody supplying any information as to the whereabouts of a Greekgentleman named Paul Kratides, from Athens, who is unable to speakEnglish, will be rewarded.  A similar reward paid to any one givinginformation about a Greek lady whose first name is Sophy. X 2473.
"That was in all the dailies.  No answer."
"How about the Greek Legation?"
"I have inquired.  They know nothing."
"A wire to the head of the Athens police, then?"
"Sherlock has all the energy of the family," said Mycroft, turning tome.  "Well, you take the case up by all means, and let me know if youdo any good."
"Certainly," answered my friend, rising from his chair.  "I'll letyou know, and Mr. Melas also.  In the meantime, Mr. Melas, I shouldcertainly be on my guard, if I were you, for of course they must knowthrough these advertisements that you have betrayed them."
As we walked home together, Holmes stopped at a telegraph office andsent off several wires.
"You see, Watson," he remarked, "our evening has been by no meanswasted.  Some of my most interesting cases have come to me in thisway through Mycroft.  The problem which we have just listened to,although it can admit of but one explanation, has still somedistinguishing features."
"You have hopes of solving it?"
"Well, knowing as much as we do, it will be singular indeed if wefail to discover the rest.  You must yourself have formed some theorywhich will explain the facts to which we have listened."
"In a vague way, yes."
"What was your idea, then?"
"It seemed to me to be obvious that this Greek girl had been carriedoff by the young Englishman named Harold Latimer."
"Carried off from where?"
"Athens, perhaps."
Sherlock Holmes shook his head.  "This young man could not talk aword of Greek.  The lady could talk English fairly well. Inference--that she had been in England some little time, but he hadnot been in Greece."
"Well, then, we will presume that she had come on a visit to England,and that this Harold had persuaded her to fly with him."
"That is more probable."
"Then the brother--for that, I fancy, must be the relationship--comesover from Greece to interfere.  He imprudently puts himself into thepower of the young man and his older associate.  They seize him anduse violence towards him in order to make him sign some papers tomake over the girl's fortune--of which he may be trustee--to them. This he refuses to do.  In order to negotiate with him they have toget an interpreter, and they pitch upon this Mr. Melas, having usedsome other one before.  The girl is not told of the arrival of herbrother, and finds it out by the merest accident."
"Excellent, Watson!" cried Holmes.  "I really fancy that you are notfar from the truth.  You see that we hold all the cards, and we haveonly to fear some sudden act of violence on their part.  If they giveus time we must have them."
"But how can we find where this house lies?"
"Well, if our conjecture is correct and the girl's name is or wasSophy Kratides, we should have no difficulty in tracing her.  Thatmust be our main hope, for the brother is, of course, a completestranger.  It is clear that some time has elapsed since this Haroldestablished these relations with the girl--some weeks, at anyrate--since the brother in Greece has had time to hear of it and comeacross.  If they have been living in the same place during this time,it is probable that we shall have some answer to Mycroft'sadvertisement."
We had reached our house in Baker Street while we had been talking. Holmes ascended the stair first, and as he opened the door of ourroom he gave a start of surprise.  Looking over his shoulder, I wasequally astonished.  His brother Mycroft was sitting smoking in thearm-chair.
"Come in, Sherlock!  Come in, sir," said he blandly, smiling at oursurprised faces.  "You don't expect such energy from me, do you,Sherlock?  But somehow this case attracts me."
"How did you get here?"
"I passed you in a hansom."
"There has been some new development?"
"I had an answer to my advertisement."
"Ah!"
"Yes, it came within a few minutes of your leaving."
"And to what effect?"
Mycroft Holmes took out a sheet of paper.
"Here it is," said he, "written with a J pen on royal cream paper bya middle-aged man with a weak constitution.
"Sir [he says]:"In answer to your advertisement of to-day's date, I beg to informyou that I know the young lady in question very well.  If you shouldcare to call upon me I could give you some particulars as to herpainful history.  She is living at present at The Myrtles, Beckenham."Yours faithfully,"J. Davenport.
"He writes from Lower Brixton," said Mycroft Holmes.  "Do you notthink that we might drive to him now, Sherlock, and learn theseparticulars?"
"My dear Mycroft, the brother's life is more valuable than thesister's story.  I think we should call at Scotland Yard forInspector Gregson, and go straight out to Beckenham.  We know that aman is being done to death, and every hour may be vital."
"Better pick up Mr. Melas on our way," I suggested.  "We may need aninterpreter."
"Excellent," said Sherlock Holmes.  "Send the boy for a four-wheeler,and we shall be off at once."  He opened the table-drawer as hespoke, and I noticed that he slipped his revolver into his pocket. "Yes," said he, in answer to my glance; "I should say from what wehave heard, that we are dealing with a particularly dangerous gang."
It was almost dark before we found ourselves in Pall Mall, at therooms of Mr. Melas.  A gentleman had just called for him, and he wasgone.
"Can you tell me where?" asked Mycroft Holmes.
"I don't know, sir," answered the woman who had opened the door; "Ionly know that he drove away with the gentleman in a carriage."
"Did the gentleman give a name?"
"No, sir."
"He wasn't a tall, handsome, dark young man?"
"Oh, no, sir.  He was a little gentleman, with glasses, thin in theface, but very pleasant in his ways, for he was laughing all the timethat he was talking."
"Come along!" cried Sherlock Holmes, abruptly.  "This grows serious,"he observed, as we drove to Scotland Yard.  "These men have got holdof Melas again.  He is a man of no physical courage, as they are wellaware from their experience the other night.  This villain was ableto terrorize him the instant that he got into his presence.  No doubtthey want his professional services, but, having used him, they maybe inclined to punish him for what they will regard as histreachery."
Our hope was that, by taking train, we might get to Beckenham as soonor sooner than the carriage.  On reaching Scotland Yard, however, itwas more than an hour before we could get Inspector Gregson andcomply with the legal formalities which would enable us to enter thehouse.  It was a quarter to ten before we reached London Bridge, andhalf past before the four of us alighted on the Beckenham platform. A drive of half a mile brought us to The Myrtles--a large, dark housestanding back from the road in its own grounds.  Here we dismissedour cab, and made our way up the drive together.
"The windows are all dark," remarked the inspector.  "The house seemsdeserted."
"Our birds are flown and the nest empty," said Holmes.
"Why do you say so?"
"A carriage heavily loaded with luggage has passed out during thelast hour."
The inspector laughed.  "I saw the wheel-tracks in the light of thegate-lamp, but where does the luggage come in?"
"You may have observed the same wheel-tracks going the other way. But the outward-bound ones were very much deeper--so much so that wecan say for a certainty that there was a very considerable weight onthe carriage."
"You get a trifle beyond me there," said the inspector, shrugging hisshoulder.  "It will not be an easy door to force, but we will try ifwe cannot make some one hear us."
He hammered loudly at the knocker and pulled at the bell, but withoutany success.  Holmes had slipped away, but he came back in a fewminutes.
"I have a window open," said he.
"It is a mercy that you are on the side of the force, and not againstit, Mr. Holmes," remarked the inspector, as he noted the clever wayin which my friend had forced back the catch.  "Well, I think thatunder the circumstances we may enter without an invitation."
One after the other we made our way into a large apartment, which wasevidently that in which Mr. Melas had found himself.  The inspectorhad lit his lantern, and by its light we could see the two doors, thecurtain, the lamp, and the suit of Japanese mail as he had describedthem.  On the table lay two glasses, and empty brandy-bottle, and theremains of a meal.
"What is that?" asked Holmes, suddenly.
We all stood still and listened.  A low moaning sound was coming fromsomewhere over our heads.  Holmes rushed to the door and out into thehall.  The dismal noise came from upstairs.  He dashed up, theinspector and I at his heels, while his brother Mycroft followed asquickly as his great bulk would permit.
Three doors faced up upon the second floor, and it was from thecentral of these that the sinister sounds were issuing, sinkingsometimes into a dull mumble and rising again into a shrill whine. It was locked, but the key had been left on the outside.  Holmesflung open the door and rushed in, but he was out again in aninstant, with his hand to his throat.
"It's charcoal," he cried.  "Give it time.  It will clear."
Peering in, we could see that the only light in the room came from adull blue flame which flickered from a small brass tripod in thecentre.  It threw a livid, unnatural circle upon the floor, while inthe shadows beyond we saw the vague loom of two figures whichcrouched against the wall.  From the open door there reeked ahorrible poisonous exhalation which set us gasping and coughing. Holmes rushed to the top of the stairs to draw in the fresh air, andthen, dashing into the room, he threw up the window and hurled thebrazen tripod out into the garden.
"We can enter in a minute," he gasped, darting out again.  "Where isa candle?  I doubt if we could strike a match in that atmosphere. Hold the light at the door and we shall get them out, Mycroft. Now!"
With a rush we got to the poisoned men and dragged them out into thewell-lit hall.  Both of them were blue-lipped and insensible, withswollen, congested faces and protruding eyes.  Indeed, so distortedwere their features that, save for his black beard and stout figure,we might have failed to recognize in one of them the Greekinterpreter who had parted from us only a few hours before at theDiogenes Club.  His hands and feet were securely strapped together,and he bore over one eye the marks of a violent blow.  The other, whowas secured in a similar fashion, was a tall man in the last stage ofemaciation, with several strips of sticking-plaster arranged in agrotesque pattern over his face.  He had ceased to moan as we laidhim down, and a glance showed me that for him at least our aid hadcome too late.  Mr. Melas, however, still lived, and in less than anhour, with the aid of ammonia and brandy I had the satisfaction ofseeing him open his eyes, and of knowing that my hand had drawn himback from that dark valley in which all paths meet.
It was a simple story which he had to tell, and one which did butconfirm our own deductions.  His visitor, on entering his rooms, haddrawn a life-preserver from his sleeve, and had so impressed him withthe fear of instant and inevitable death that he had kidnapped himfor the second time.  Indeed, it was almost mesmeric, the effectwhich this giggling ruffian had produced upon the unfortunatelinguist, for he could not speak of him save with trembling hands anda blanched cheek.  He had been taken swiftly to Beckenham, and hadacted as interpreter in a second interview, even more dramatic thanthe first, in which the two Englishmen had menaced their prisonerwith instant death if he did not comply with their demands.  Finally,finding him proof against every threat, they had hurled him back intohis prison, and after reproaching Melas with his treachery, whichappeared from the newspaper advertisement, they had stunned him witha blow from a stick, and he remembered nothing more until he found usbending over him.
And this was the singular case of the Grecian Interpreter, theexplanation of which is still involved in some mystery.  We were ableto find out, by communicating with the gentleman who had answered theadvertisement, that the unfortunate young lady came of a wealthyGrecian family, and that she had been on a visit to some friends inEngland.  While there she had met a young man named Harold Latimer,who had acquired an ascendancy over her and had eventually persuadedher to fly with him.  Her friends, shocked at the event, hadcontented themselves with informing her brother at Athens, and hadthen washed their hands of the matter.  The brother, on his arrivalin England, had imprudently placed himself in the power of Latimerand of his associate, whose name was Wilson Kemp--a man of thefoulest antecedents. These two, finding that  through his ignoranceof the language he was helpless in their hands, had kept him aprisoner, and had endeavored by cruelty and starvation to make himsign away his own and his sister's property.  They had kept him inthe house without the girl's knowledge, and the plaster over the facehad been for the purpose of making recognition difficult in case sheshould ever catch a glimpse of him.  Her feminine perception,however, had instantly seen through the disguise when, on theoccasion of the interpreter's visit, she had seen him for the firsttime.  The poor girl, however, was herself a prisoner, for there wasno one about the house except the man who acted as coachman, and hiswife, both of whom were tools of the conspirators.  Finding thattheir secret was out, and that their prisoner was not to be coerced,the two villains with the girl had fled away at a few hours' noticefrom the furnished house which they had hired, having first, as theythought, taken vengeance both upon the man who had defied and the onewho had betrayed them.
Months afterwards a curious newspaper cutting reached us fromBuda-Pesth.  It told how two Englishmen who had been traveling with awoman had met with a tragic end.  They had each been stabbed, itseems, and the Hungarian police were of opinion that they hadquarreled and had inflicted mortal injuries upon each other.  Holmes,however, is, I fancy, of a different way of thinking, and holds tothis day that, if one could find the Grecian girl, one might learnhow the wrongs of herself and her brother came to be avenged.





                           THE NAVAL TREATY
The July which immediately succeeded my marriage was made memorableby three cases of interest, in which I had the privilege of beingassociated with Sherlock Holmes and of studying his methods. I findthem recorded in my notes under the headings of "The Adventure of theSecond Stain," "The Adventure of the Naval Treaty," and "TheAdventure of the Tired Captain." The first of these, however, dealswith interest of such importance and implicates so many of the firstfamilies in the kingdom that for many years it will be impossible tomake it public. No case, however, in which Holmes was engaged hasever illustrated the value of his analytical methods so clearly orhas impressed those who were associated with him so deeply. I stillretain an almost verbatim report of the interview in which hedemonstrated the true facts of the case to Monsieur Dubugue of theParis police, and Fritz von Waldbaum, the well-known specialist ofDantzig, both of whom had wasted their energies upon what proved tobe side-issues. The new century will have come, however, before thestory can be safely told. Meanwhile I pass on to the second on mylist, which promised also at one time to be of national importance,and was marked by several incidents which give it a quite uniquecharacter.
During my school-days I had been intimately associated with a ladnamed Percy Phelps, who was of much the same age as myself, though hewas two classes ahead of me. He was a very brilliant boy, and carriedaway every prize which the school had to offer, finishing hisexploits by winning a scholarship which sent him on to continue histriumphant career at Cambridge. He was, I remember, extremely wellconnected, and even when we were all little boys together we knewthat his mother's brother was Lord Holdhurst, the great conservativepolitician. This gaudy relationship did him little good at school. Onthe contrary, it seemed rather a piquant thing to us to chevy himabout the playground and hit him over the shins with a wicket. But itwas another thing when he came out into the world. I heard vaguelythat his abilities and the influences which he commanded had won hima good position at the Foreign Office, and then he passed completelyout of my mind until the following letter recalled his existence:
Briarbrae, Woking.My dear Watson:I have no doubt that you can remember "Tadpole" Phelps, who was inthe fifth form when you were in the third. It is possible even thatyou may have heard that through my uncle's influence I obtained agood appointment at the Foreign Office, and that I was in a situationof trust and honor until a horrible misfortune came suddenly to blastmy career.There is no use writing of the details of that dreadful event. In theevent of your acceding to my request it is probable that I shall haveto narrate them to you. I have only just recovered from nine weeks ofbrain-fever, and am still exceedingly weak. Do you think that youcould bring your friend Mr. Holmes down to see me? I should like tohave his opinion of the case, though the authorities assure me thatnothing more can be done. Do try to bring him down, and as soon aspossible. Every minute seems an hour while I live in this state ofhorrible suspense. Assure him that if I have not asked his advicesooner it was not because I did not appreciate his talents, butbecause I have been off my head ever since the blow fell. Now I amclear again, though I dare not think of it too much for fear of arelapse. I am still so weak that I have to write, as you see, bydictating. Do try to bring him.Your old school-fellow,Percy Phelps.
There was something that touched me as I read this letter, somethingpitiable in the reiterated appeals to bring Holmes. So moved was Ithat even had it been a difficult matter I should have tried it, butof course I knew well that Holmes loved his art, so that he was everas ready to bring his aid as his client could be to receive it. Mywife agreed with me that not a moment should be lost in laying thematter before him, and so within an hour of breakfast-time I foundmyself back once more in the old rooms in Baker Street.
Holmes was seated at his side-table clad in his dressing-gown, andworking hard over a chemical investigation. A large curved retort wasboiling furiously in the bluish flame of a Bunsen burner, and thedistilled drops were condensing into a two-litre measure. My friendhardly glanced up as I entered, and I, seeing that his investigationmust be of importance, seated myself in an arm-chair and waited. Hedipped into this bottle or that, drawing out a few drops of each withhis glass pipette, and finally brought a test-tube containing asolution over to the table. In his right hand he held a slip oflitmus-paper.
"You come at a crisis, Watson," said he. "If this paper remains blue,all is well. If it turns red, it means a man's life." He dipped itinto the test-tube and it flushed at once into a dull, dirty crimson."Hum! I thought as much!" he cried. "I will be at your service in aninstant, Watson. You will find tobacco in the Persian slipper." Heturned to his desk and scribbled off several telegrams, which werehanded over to the page-boy. Then he threw himself down into thechair opposite, and drew up his knees until his fingers clasped roundhis long, thin shins.
"A very commonplace little murder," said he. "You've got somethingbetter, I fancy. You are the stormy petrel of crime, Watson. What isit?"
I handed him the letter, which he read with the most concentratedattention.
"It does not tell us very much, does it?" he remarked, as he handedit back to me.
"Hardly anything."
"And yet the writing is of interest."
"But the writing is not his own."
"Precisely. It is a woman's."
"A man's surely," I cried.
"No, a woman's, and a woman of rare character. You see, at thecommencement of an investigation it is something to know that yourclient is in close contact with some one who, for good or evil, hasan exceptional nature. My interest is already awakened in the case.If you are ready we will start at once for Woking, and see thisdiplomatist who is in such evil case, and the lady to whom hedictates his letters."
We were fortunate enough to catch an early train at Waterloo, and ina little under an hour we found ourselves among the fir-woods and theheather of Woking. Briarbrae proved to be a large detached housestanding in extensive grounds within a few minutes' walk of thestation. On sending in our cards we were shown into an elegantlyappointed drawing-room, where we were joined in a few minutes by arather stout man who received us with much hospitality. His age mayhave been nearer forty than thirty, but his cheeks were so ruddy andhis eyes so merry that he still conveyed the impression of a plumpand mischievous boy.
"I am so glad that you have come," said he, shaking our hands witheffusion. "Percy has been inquiring for you all morning. Ah, poor oldchap, he clings to any straw! His father and his mother asked me tosee you, for the mere mention of the subject is very painful tothem."
"We have had no details yet," observed Holmes. "I perceive that youare not yourself a member of the family."
Our acquaintance looked surprised, and then, glancing down, he beganto laugh.
"Of course you saw the J H monogram on my locket," said he. "For amoment I thought you had done something clever. Joseph Harrison is myname, and as Percy is to marry my sister Annie I shall at least be arelation by marriage. You will find my sister in his room, for shehas nursed him hand-and-foot this two months back. Perhaps we'dbetter go in at once, for I know how impatient he is."
The chamber in which we were shown was on the same floor as thedrawing-room. It was furnished partly as a sitting and partly as abedroom, with flowers arranged daintily in every nook and corner. Ayoung man, very pale and worn, was lying upon a sofa near the openwindow, through which came the rich scent of the garden and the balmysummer air. A woman was sitting beside him, who rose as we entered.
"Shall I leave, Percy?" she asked.
He clutched her hand to detain her. "How are you, Watson?" said he,cordially. "I should never have known you under that moustache, and Idare say you would not be prepared to swear to me. This I presume isyour celebrated friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes?"
I introduced him in a few words, and we both sat down. The stoutyoung man had left us, but his sister still remained with her hand inthat of the invalid. She was a striking-looking woman, a little shortand thick for symmetry, but with a beautiful olive complexion, large,dark, Italian eyes, and a wealth of deep black hair. Her rich tintsmade the white face of her companion the more worn and haggard by thecontrast.
"I won't waste your time," said he, raising himself upon the sofa."I'll plunge into the matter without further preamble. I was a happyand successful man, Mr. Holmes, and on the eve of being married, whena sudden and dreadful misfortune wrecked all my prospects in life.
"I was, as Watson may have told you, in the Foreign Office, andthrough the influences of my uncle, Lord Holdhurst, I rose rapidly toa responsible position. When my uncle became foreign minister in thisadministration he gave me several missions of trust, and as I alwaysbrought them to a successful conclusion, he came at last to have theutmost confidence in my ability and tact.
"Nearly ten weeks ago--to be more accurate, on the twenty-third ofMay--he called me into his private room, and, after complimenting meon the good work which I had done, he informed me that he had a newcommission of trust for me to execute.
"'This,' said he, taking a gray roll of paper from his bureau, 'isthe original of that secret treaty between England and Italy ofwhich, I regret to say, some rumors have already got into the publicpress. It is of enormous importance that nothing further should leakout. The French or the Russian embassy would pay an immense sum tolearn the contents of these papers. They should not leave my bureauwere it not that it is absolutely necessary to have them copied. Youhave a desk in your office?'
"'Yes, sir.'
"'Then take the treaty and lock it up there. I shall give directionsthat you may remain behind when the others go, so that you may copyit at your leisure without fear of being overlooked. When you havefinished, relock both the original and the draft in the desk, andhand them over to me personally to-morrow morning.'
"I took the papers and--"
"Excuse me an instant," said Holmes. "Were you alone during thisconversation?"
"Absolutely."
"In a large room?"
"Thirty feet each way."
"In the centre?"
"Yes, about it."
"And speaking low?"
"My uncle's voice is always remarkably low. I hardly spoke at all."
"Thank you," said Holmes, shutting his eyes; "pray go on."
"I did exactly what he indicated, and waited until the other clerkshad departed. One of them in my room, Charles Gorot, had some arrearsof work to make up, so I left him there and went out to dine. When Ireturned he was gone. I was anxious to hurry my work, for I knew thatJoseph--the Mr. Harrison whom you saw just now--was in town, and thathe would travel down to Woking by the eleven-o'clock train, and Iwanted if possible to catch it.
"When I came to examine the treaty I saw at once that it was of suchimportance that my uncle had been guilty of no exaggeration in whathe had said. Without going into details, I may say that it definedthe position of Great Britain towards the Triple Alliance, andfore-shadowed the policy which this country would pursue in the eventof the French fleet gaining a complete ascendancy over that of Italyin the Mediterranean. The questions treated in it were purely naval.At the end were the signatures of the high dignitaries who had signedit. I glanced my eyes over it, and then settled down to my task ofcopying.
"It was a long document, written in the French language, andcontaining twenty-six separate articles. I copied as quickly as Icould, but at nine o'clock I had only done nine articles, and itseemed hopeless for me to attempt to catch my train. I was feelingdrowsy and stupid, partly from my dinner and also from the effects ofa long day's work. A cup of coffee would clear my brain. Acommissionaire remains all night in a little lodge at the foot of thestairs, and is in the habit of making coffee at his spirit-lamp forany of the officials who may be working over time. I rang the bell,therefore, to summon him.
"To my surprise, it was a woman who answered the summons, a large,coarse-faced, elderly woman, in an apron. She explained that she wasthe commissionaire's wife, who did the charing, and I gave her theorder for the coffee.
"I wrote two more articles and then, feeling more drowsy than ever, Irose and walked up and down the room to stretch my legs. My coffeehad not yet come, and I wondered what was the cause of the delaycould be. Opening the door, I started down the corridor to find out.There was a straight passage, dimly lighted, which led from the roomin which I had been working, and was the only exit from it. It endedin a curving staircase, with the commissionaire's lodge in thepassage at the bottom. Half way down this staircase is a smalllanding, with another passage running into it at right angles. Thissecond one leads by means of a second small stair to a side door,used by servants, and also as a short cut by clerks when coming fromCharles Street. Here is a rough chart of the place."
"Thank you. I think that I quite follow you," said Sherlock Holmes.
"It is of the utmost importance that you should notice this point. Iwent down the stairs and into the hall, where I found thecommissionaire fast asleep in his box, with the kettle boilingfuriously upon the spirit-lamp. I took off the kettle and blew outthe lamp, for the water was spurting over the floor. Then I put outmy hand and was about to shake the man, who was still sleepingsoundly, when a bell over his head rang loudly, and he woke with astart.
"'Mr. Phelps, sir!' said he, looking at me in bewilderment.
"'I came down to see if my coffee was ready.'
"'I was boiling the kettle when I fell asleep, sir.' He looked at meand then up at the still quivering bell with an ever-growingastonishment upon his face.
"'If you was here, sir, then who rang the bell?' he asked.
"'The bell!' I cried. 'What bell is it?'
"'It's the bell of the room you were working in.'
"A cold hand seemed to close round my heart. Some one, then, was inthat room where my precious treaty lay upon the table. I ranfrantically up the stair and along the passage. There was no one inthe corridors, Mr. Holmes. There was no one in the room. All wasexactly as I left it, save only that the papers which had beencommitted to my care had been taken from the desk on which they lay.The copy was there, and the original was gone."
Holmes sat up in his chair and rubbed his hands. I could see that theproblem was entirely to his heart. "Pray, what did you do then?" hemurmured.
"I recognized in an instant that the thief must have come up thestairs from the side door. Of course I must have met him if he hadcome the other way."
"You were satisfied that he could not have been concealed in the roomall the time, or in the corridor which you have just described asdimly lighted?"
"It is absolutely impossible. A rat could not conceal himself eitherin the room or the corridor. There is no cover at all."
"Thank you. Pray proceed."
"The commissionaire, seeing by my pale face that something was to befeared, had followed me upstairs. Now we both rushed along thecorridor and down the steep steps which led to Charles Street. Thedoor at the bottom was closed, but unlocked. We flung it open andrushed out. I can distinctly remember that as we did so there camethree chimes from a neighboring clock. It was quarter to ten."
"That is of enormous importance," said Holmes, making a note upon hisshirt-cuff.
"The night was very dark, and a thin, warm rain was falling. Therewas no one in Charles Street, but a great traffic was going on, asusual, in Whitehall, at the extremity. We rushed along the pavement,bare-headed as we were, and at the far corner we found a policemanstanding.
"'A robbery has been committed,' I gasped. 'A document of immensevalue has been stolen from the Foreign Office. Has any one passedthis way?'
"'I have been standing here for a quarter of an hour, sir,' said he;'only one person has passed during that time--a woman, tall andelderly, with a Paisley shawl.'
"'Ah, that is only my wife,' cried the commissionaire; 'has no oneelse passed?'
"'No one.'
"'Then it must be the other way that the thief took,' cried thefellow, tugging at my sleeve.
"But I was not satisfied, and the attempts which he made to draw meaway increased my suspicions.
"'Which way did the woman go?' I cried.
"'I don't know, sir. I noticed her pass, but I had no special reasonfor watching her. She seemed to be in a hurry.'
"'How long ago was it?'
"'Oh, not very many minutes.'
"'Within the last five?'
"'Well, it could not be more than five.'
"'You're only wasting your time, sir, and every minute now is ofimportance,' cried the commissionaire; 'take my word for it that myold woman has nothing to do with it, and come down to the other endof the street. Well, if you won't, I will.' And with that he rushedoff in the other direction.
"But I was after him in an instant and caught him by the sleeve.
"'Where do you live?' said I.
"'16 Ivy Lane, Brixton,' he answered. 'But don't let yourself bedrawn away upon a false scent, Mr. Phelps. Come to the other end ofthe street and let us see if we can hear of anything.'
"Nothing was to be lost by following his advice. With the policemanwe both hurried down, but only to find the street full of traffic,many people coming and going, but all only too eager to get to aplace of safety upon so wet a night. There was no lounger who couldtell us who had passed.
"Then we returned to the office, and searched the stairs and thepassage without result. The corridor which led to the room was laiddown with a kind of creamy linoleum which shows an impression veryeasily. We examined it very carefully, but found no outline of anyfootmark."
"Had it been raining all evening?"
"Since about seven."
"How is it, then, that the woman who came into the room about nineleft no traces with her muddy boots?"
"I am glad you raised the point. It occurred to me at the time. Thecharwomen are in the habit of taking off their boots at thecommissionaire's office, and putting on list slippers."
"That is very clear. There were no marks, then, though the night wasa wet one? The chain of events is certainly one of extraordinaryinterest. What did you do next?"
"We examined the room also. There is no possibility of a secret door,and the windows are quite thirty feet from the ground. Both of themwere fastened on the inside. The carpet prevents any possibility of atrap-door, and the ceiling is of the ordinary whitewashed kind. Iwill pledge my life that whoever stole my papers could only have comethrough the door."
"How about the fireplace?"
"They use none. There is a stove. The bell-rope hangs from the wirejust to the right of my desk. Whoever rang it must have come right upto the desk to do it. But why should any criminal wish to ring thebell? It is a most insoluble mystery."
"Certainly the incident was unusual. What were your next steps? Youexamined the room, I presume, to see if the intruder had left anytraces--any cigar-end or dropped glove or hairpin or other trifle?"
"There was nothing of the sort."
"No smell?"
"Well, we never thought of that."
"Ah, a scent of tobacco would have been worth a great deal to us insuch an investigation."
"I never smoke myself, so I think I should have observed it if therehad been any smell of tobacco. There was absolutely no clue of anykind. The only tangible fact was that the commissionaire's wife--Mrs.Tangey was the name--had hurried out of the place. He could give noexplanation save that it was about the time when the woman alwayswent home. The policeman and I agreed that our best plan would be toseize the woman before she could get rid of the papers, presumingthat she had them.
"The alarm had reached Scotland Yard by this time, and Mr. Forbes,the detective, came round at once and took up the case with a greatdeal of energy. We hired a hansom, and in half an hour we were at theaddress which had been given to us. A young woman opened the door,who proved to be Mrs. Tangey's eldest daughter. Her mother had notcome back yet, and we were shown into the front room to wait.
"About ten minutes later a knock came at the door, and here we madethe one serious mistake for which I blame myself. Instead of openingthe door ourselves, we allowed the girl to do so. We heard her say,'Mother, there are two men in the house waiting to see you,' and aninstant afterwards we heard the patter of feet rushing down thepassage. Forbes flung open the door, and we both ran into the backroom or kitchen, but the woman had got there before us. She stared atus with defiant eyes, and then, suddenly recognizing me, anexpression of absolute astonishment came over her face.
"'Why, if it isn't Mr. Phelps, of the office!' she cried.
"'Come, come, who did you think we were when you ran away from us?'asked my companion.
"'I thought you were the brokers,' said she, 'we have had sometrouble with a tradesman.'
"'That's not quite good enough,' answered Forbes. 'We have reason tobelieve that you have taken a paper of importance from the ForeignOffice, and that you ran in here to dispose of it. You must come backwith us to Scotland Yard to be searched.'
"It was in vain that she protested and resisted. A four-wheeler wasbrought, and we all three drove back in it. We had first made anexamination of the kitchen, and especially of the kitchen fire, tosee whether she might have made away with the papers during theinstant that she was alone. There were no signs, however, of anyashes or scraps. When we reached Scotland Yard she was handed over atonce to the female searcher. I waited in an agony of suspense untilshe came back with her report. There were no signs of the papers.
"Then for the first time the horror of my situation came in its fullforce. Hitherto I had been acting, and action had numbed thought. Ihad been so confident of regaining the treaty at once that I had notdared to think of what would be the consequence if I failed to do so.But now there was nothing more to be done, and I had leisure torealize my position. It was horrible. Watson there would tell youthat I was a nervous, sensitive boy at school. It is my nature. Ithought of my uncle and of his colleagues in the Cabinet, of theshame which I had brought upon him, upon myself, upon every oneconnected with me. What though I was the victim of an extraordinaryaccident? No allowance is made for accidents where diplomaticinterests are at stake. I was ruined, shamefully, hopelessly ruined.I don't know what I did. I fancy I must have made a scene. I have adim recollection of a group of officials who crowded round me,endeavoring to soothe me. One of them drove down with me to Waterloo,and saw me into the Woking train. I believe that he would have comeall the way had it not been that Dr. Ferrier, who lives near me, wasgoing down by that very train. The doctor most kindly took charge ofme, and it was well he did so, for I had a fit in the station, andbefore we reached home I was practically a raving maniac.
"You can imagine the state of things here when they were roused fromtheir beds by the doctor's ringing and found me in this condition.Poor Annie here and my mother were broken-hearted. Dr. Ferrier hadjust heard enough from the detective at the station to be able togive an idea of what had happened, and his story did not mendmatters. It was evident to all that I was in for a long illness, soJoseph was bundled out of this cheery bedroom, and it was turned intoa sick-room for me. Here I have lain, Mr. Holmes, for over nineweeks, unconscious, and raving with brain-fever. If it had not beenfor Miss Harrison here and for the doctor's care I should not bespeaking to you now. She has nursed me by day and a hired nurse haslooked after me by night, for in my mad fits I was capable ofanything. Slowly my reason has cleared, but it is only during thelast three days that my memory has quite returned. Sometimes I wishthat it never had. The first thing that I did was to wire to Mr.Forbes, who had the case in hand. He came out, and assures me that,though everything has been done, no trace of a clue has beendiscovered. The commissionaire and his wife have been examined inevery way without any light being thrown upon the matter. Thesuspicions of the police then rested upon young Gorot, who, as youmay remember, stayed over time in the office that night. Hisremaining behind and his French name were really the only two pointswhich could suggest suspicion; but, as a matter of fact, I did notbegin work until he had gone, and his people are of Huguenotextraction, but as English in sympathy and tradition as you and Iare. Nothing was found to implicate him in any way, and there thematter dropped. I turn to you, Mr. Holmes, as absolutely my lasthope. If you fail me, then my honor as well as my position areforever forfeited."
The invalid sank back upon his cushions, tired out by this longrecital, while his nurse poured him out a glass of some stimulatingmedicine. Holmes sat silently, with his head thrown back and his eyesclosed, in an attitude which might seem listless to a stranger, butwhich I knew betokened the most intense self-absorption.
"You statement has been so explicit," said he at last, "that you havereally left me very few questions to ask. There is one of the veryutmost importance, however. Did you tell any one that you had thisspecial task to perform?"
"No one."
"Not Miss Harrison here, for example?"
"No. I had not been back to Woking between getting the order andexecuting the commission."
"And none of your people had by chance been to see you?"
"None."
"Did any of them know their way about in the office?"
"Oh, yes, all of them had been shown over it."
"Still, of course, if you said nothing to any one about the treatythese inquiries are irrelevant."
"I said nothing."
"Do you know anything of the commissionaire?"
"Nothing except that he is an old soldier."
"What regiment?"
"Oh, I have heard--Coldstream Guards."
"Thank you. I have no doubt I can get details from Forbes. Theauthorities are excellent at amassing facts, though they do notalways use them to advantage. What a lovely thing a rose is!"
He walked past the couch to the open window, and held up the droopingstalk of a moss-rose, looking down at the dainty blend of crimson andgreen. It was a new phase of his character to me, for I had neverbefore seen him show any keen interest in natural objects.
"There is nothing in which deduction is so necessary as in religion,"said he, leaning with his back against the shutters. "It can be builtup as an exact science by the reasoner. Our highest assurance of thegoodness of Providence seems to me to rest in the flowers. All otherthings, our powers our desires, our food, are all really necessaryfor our existence in the first instance. But this rose is an extra.Its smell and its color are an embellishment of life, not a conditionof it. It is only goodness which gives extras, and so I say againthat we have much to hope from the flowers."
Percy Phelps and his nurse looked at Holmes during this demonstrationwith surprise and a good deal of disappointment written upon theirfaces. He had fallen into a reverie, with the moss-rose between hisfingers. It had lasted some minutes before the young lady broke inupon it.
"Do you see any prospect of solving this mystery, Mr. Holmes?" sheasked, with a touch of asperity in her voice.
"Oh, the mystery!" he answered, coming back with a start to therealities of life. "Well, it would be absurd to deny that the case isa very abstruse and complicated one, but I can promise you that Iwill look into the matter and let you know any points which maystrike me."
"Do you see any clue?"
"You have furnished me with seven, but, of course, I must test thembefore I can pronounce upon their value."
"You suspect some one?"
"I suspect myself."
"What!"
"Of coming to conclusions too rapidly."
"Then go to London and test your conclusions."
"Your advice is very excellent, Miss Harrison," said Holmes, rising."I think, Watson, we cannot do better. Do not allow yourself toindulge in false hopes, Mr. Phelps. The affair is a very tangledone."
"I shall be in a fever until I see you again," cried the diplomatist.
"Well, I'll come out by the same train to-morrow, though it's morethan likely that my report will be a negative one."
"God bless you for promising to come," cried our client. "It gives mefresh life to know that something is being done. By the way, I havehad a letter from Lord Holdhurst."
"Ha! What did he say?"
"He was cold, but not harsh. I dare say my severe illness preventedhim from being that. He repeated that the matter was of the utmostimportance, and added that no steps would be taken about myfuture--by which he means, of course, my dismissal--until my healthwas restored and I had an opportunity of repairing my misfortune."
"Well, that was reasonable and considerate," said Holmes. "Come,Watson, for we have a good day's work before us in town."
Mr. Joseph Harrison drove us down to the station, and we were soonwhirling up in a Portsmouth train. Holmes was sunk in profoundthought, and hardly opened his mouth until we had passed ClaphamJunction.
"It's a very cheery thing to come into London by any of these lineswhich run high, and allow you to look down upon the houses likethis."
I thought he was joking, for the view was sordid enough, but he soonexplained himself.
"Look at those big, isolated clumps of building rising up above theslates, like brick islands in a lead-colored sea."
"The board-schools."
"Light-houses, my boy! Beacons of the future! Capsules with hundredsof bright little seeds in each, out of which will spring the wise,better England of the future. I suppose that man Phelps does notdrink?"
"I should not think so."
"Nor should I, but we are bound to take every possibility intoaccount. The poor devil has certainly got himself into very deepwater, and it's a question whether we shall ever be able to get himashore. What did you think of Miss Harrison?"
"A girl of strong character."
"Yes, but she is a good sort, or I am mistaken. She and her brotherare the only children of an iron-master somewhere up Northumberlandway. He got engaged to her when traveling last winter, and she camedown to be introduced to his people, with her brother as escort. Thencame the smash, and she stayed on to nurse her lover, while brotherJoseph, finding himself pretty snug, stayed on too. I've been makinga few independent inquiries, you see. But to-day must be a day ofinquiries."
"My practice--" I began.
"Oh, if you find your own cases more interesting than mine--" saidHolmes, with some asperity.
"I was going to say that my practice could get along very well for aday or two, since it is the slackest time in the year."
"Excellent," said he, recovering his good-humor. "Then we'll lookinto this matter together. I think that we should begin by seeingForbes. He can probably tell us all the details we want until we knowfrom what side the case is to be approached."
"You said you had a clue?"
"Well, we have several, but we can only test their value by furtherinquiry. The most difficult crime to track is the one which ispurposeless. Now this is not purposeless. Who is it who profits byit? There is the French ambassador, there is the Russian, there iswho-ever might sell it to either of these, and there is LordHoldhurst."
"Lord Holdhurst!"
"Well, it is just conceivable that a statesman might find himself ina position where he was not sorry to have such a documentaccidentally destroyed."
"Not a statesman with the honorable record of Lord Holdhurst?"
"It is a possibility and we cannot afford to disregard it. We shallsee the noble lord to-day and find out if he can tell us anything.Meanwhile I have already set inquiries on foot."
"Already?"
"Yes, I sent wires from Woking station to every evening paper inLondon. This advertisement will appear in each of them."
He handed over a sheet torn from a note-book. On it was scribbled inpencil:
"10 reward. The number of the cab which dropped a fare at or aboutthe door of the Foreign Office in Charles Street at quarter to ten inthe evening of May 23d. Apply 221b, Baker Street."
"You are confident that the thief came in a cab?"
"If not, there is no harm done. But if Mr. Phelps is correct instating that there is no hiding-place either in the room or thecorridors, then the person must have come from outside. If he camefrom outside on so wet a night, and yet left no trace of damp uponthe linoleum, which was examined within a few minutes of his passing,then it is exceeding probably that he came in a cab. Yes, I thinkthat we may safely deduce a cab."
"It sounds plausible."
"That is one of the clues of which I spoke. It may lead us tosomething. And then, of course, there is the bell--which is the mostdistinctive feature of the case. Why should the bell ring? Was it thethief who did it out of bravado? Or was it some one who was with thethief who did it in order to prevent the crime? Or was it anaccident? Or was it--?" He sank back into the state of intense andsilent thought from which he had emerged; but it seemed to me,accustomed as I was to his every mood, that some new possibility haddawned suddenly upon him.
It was twenty past three when we reached our terminus, and after ahasty luncheon at the buffet we pushed on at once to Scotland Yard.Holmes had already wired to Forbes, and we found him waiting toreceive us--a small, foxy man with a sharp but by no means amiableexpression. He was decidedly frigid in his manner to us, especiallywhen he heard the errand upon which we had come.
"I've heard of your methods before now, Mr. Holmes," said he, tartly."You are ready enough to use all the information that the police canlay at your disposal, and then you try to finish the case yourselfand bring discredit on them."
"On the contrary," said Holmes, "out of my last fifty-three cases myname has only appeared in four, and the police have had all thecredit in forty-nine. I don't blame you for not knowing this, for youare young and inexperienced, but if you wish to get on in your newduties you will work with me and not against me."
"I'd be very glad of a hint or two," said the detective, changing hismanner. "I've certainly had no credit from the case so far."
"What steps have you taken?"
"Tangey, the commissionaire, has been shadowed. He left the Guardswith a good character and we can find nothing against him. His wifeis a bad lot, though. I fancy she knows more about this thanappears."
"Have you shadowed her?"
"We have set one of our women on to her. Mrs. Tangey drinks, and ourwoman has been with her twice when she was well on, but she could getnothing out of her."
"I understand that they have had brokers in the house?"
"Yes, but they were paid off."
"Where did the money come from?"
"That was all right. His pension was due. They have not shown anysign of being in funds."
"What explanation did she give of having answered the bell when Mr.Phelps rang for the coffee?"
"She said that he husband was very tired and she wished to relievehim."
"Well, certainly that would agree with his being found a little laterasleep in his chair. There is nothing against them then but thewoman's character. Did you ask her why she hurried away that night?Her haste attracted the attention of the police constable."
"She was later than usual and wanted to get home."
"Did you point out to her that you and Mr. Phelps, who started atleast twenty minutes after he, got home before her?"
"She explains that by the difference between a 'bus and a hansom."
"Did she make it clear why, on reaching her house, she ran into theback kitchen?"
"Because she had the money there with which to pay off the brokers."
"She has at least an answer for everything. Did you ask her whetherin leaving she met any one or saw any one loitering about CharlesStreet?"
"She saw no one but the constable."
"Well, you seem to have cross-examined her pretty thoroughly. Whatelse have you done?"
"The clerk Gorot has been shadowed all these nine weeks, but withoutresult. We can show nothing against him."
"Anything else?"
"Well, we have nothing else to go upon--no evidence of any kind."
"Have you formed a theory about how that bell rang?"
"Well, I must confess that it beats me. It was a cool hand, whoeverit was, to go and give the alarm like that."
"Yes, it was a queer thing to do. Many thanks to you for what youhave told me. If I can put the man into your hands you shall hearfrom me. Come along, Watson."
"Where are we going to now?" I asked, as we left the office.
"We are now going to interview Lord Holdhurst, the cabinet ministerand future premier of England."
We were fortunate in finding that Lord Holdhurst was still in hischambers in Downing Street, and on Holmes sending in his card we wereinstantly shown up. The statesman received us with that old-fashionedcourtesy for which he is remarkable, and seated us on the twoluxuriant lounges on either side of the fireplace. Standing on therug between us, with his slight, tall figure, his sharp features,thoughtful face, and curling hair prematurely tinged with gray, heseemed to represent that not too common type, a nobleman who is intruth noble.
"Your name is very familiar to me, Mr. Holmes," said he, smiling."And, of course, I cannot pretend to be ignorant of the object ofyour visit. There has only been one occurrence in these offices whichcould call for your attention. In whose interest are you acting, mayI ask?"
"In that of Mr. Percy Phelps," answered Holmes.
"Ah, my unfortunate nephew! You can understand that our kinship makesit the more impossible for me to screen him in any way. I fear thatthe incident must have a very prejudicial effect upon his career."
"But if the document is found?"
"Ah, that, of course, would be different."
"I had one or two questions which I wished to ask you, LordHoldhurst."
"I shall be happy to give you any information in my power."
"Was it in this room that you gave your instructions as to thecopying of the document?"
"It was."
"Then you could hardly have been overheard?"
"It is out of the question."
"Did you ever mention to any one that it was your intention to giveany one the treaty to be copied?"
"Never."
"You are certain of that?"
"Absolutely."
"Well, since you never said so, and Mr. Phelps never said so, andnobody else knew anything of the matter, then the thief's presence inthe room was purely accidental. He saw his chance and he took it."
The statesman smiled. "You take me out of my province there," saidhe.
Holmes considered for a moment. "There is another very importantpoint which I wish to discuss with you," said he. "You feared, as Iunderstand, that very grave results might follow from the details ofthis treaty becoming known."
A shadow passed over the expressive face of the statesman. "Verygrave results indeed."
"And have they occurred?"
"Not yet."
"If the treaty had reached, let us say, the French or Russian ForeignOffice, you would expect to hear of it?"
"I should," said Lord Holdhurst, with a wry face.
"Since nearly ten weeks have elapsed, then, and nothing has beenheard, it is not unfair to suppose that for some reason the treatyhas not reached them."
Lord Holdhurst shrugged his shoulders.
"We can hardly suppose, Mr. Holmes, that the thief took the treaty inorder to frame it and hang it up."
"Perhaps he is waiting for a better price."
"If he waits a little longer he will get no price at all. The treatywill cease to be secret in a few months."
"That is most important," said Holmes. "Of course, it is a possiblesupposition that the thief has had a sudden illness--"
"An attack of brain-fever, for example?" asked the statesman,flashing a swift glance at him.
"I did not say so," said Holmes, imperturbably. "And now, LordHoldhurst, we have already taken up too much of your valuable time,and we shall wish you good-day."
"Every success to your investigation, be the criminal who it may,"answered the nobleman, as he bowed us out the door.
"He's a fine fellow," said Holmes, as we came out into Whitehall."But he has a struggle to keep up his position. He is far from richand has many calls. You noticed, of course, that his boots had beenre-soled? Now, Watson, I won't detain you from your legitimate workany longer. I shall do nothing more to-day, unless I have an answerto my cab advertisement. But I should be extremely obliged to you ifyou would come down with me to Woking to-morrow, by the same trainwhich we took yesterday."
I met him accordingly next morning and we traveled down to Wokingtogether. He had had no answer to his advertisement, he said, and nofresh light had been thrown upon the case. He had, when he so willedit, the utter immobility of countenance of a red Indian, and I couldnot gather from his appearance whether he was satisfied or not withthe position of the case. His conversation, I remember, was about theBertillon system of measurements, and he expressed his enthusiasticadmiration of the French savant.
We found our client still under the charge of his devoted nurse, butlooking considerably better than before. He rose from the sofa andgreeted us without difficulty when we entered.
"Any news?" he asked, eagerly.
"My report, as I expected, is a negative one," said Holmes. "I haveseen Forbes, and I have seen your uncle, and I have set one or twotrains of inquiry upon foot which may lead to something."
"You have not lost heart, then?"
"By no means."
"God bless you for saying that!" cried Miss Harrison. "If we keep ourcourage and our patience the truth must come out."
"We have more to tell you than you have for us," said Phelps,reseating himself upon the couch.
"I hoped you might have something."
"Yes, we have had an adventure during the night, and one which mighthave proved to be a serious one." His expression grew very grave ashe spoke, and a look of something akin to fear sprang up in his eyes."Do you know," said he, "that I begin to believe that I am theunconscious centre of some monstrous conspiracy, and that my life isaimed at as well as my honor?"
"Ah!" cried Holmes.
"It sounds incredible, for I have not, as far as I know, an enemy inthe world. Yet from last night's experience I can come to no otherconclusion."
"Pray let me hear it."
"You must know that last night was the very first night that I haveever slept without a nurse in the room. I was so much better that Ithought I could dispense with one. I had a night-light burning,however. Well, about two in the morning I had sunk into a light sleepwhen I was suddenly aroused by a slight noise. It was like the soundwhich a mouse makes when it is gnawing a plank, and I lay listeningto it for some time under the impression that it must come from thatcause. Then it grew louder, and suddenly there came from the window asharp metallic snick. I sat up in amazement. There could be no doubtwhat the sounds were now. The first ones had been caused by some oneforcing an instrument through the slit between the sashes, and thesecond by the catch being pressed back.
"There was a pause then for about ten minutes, as if the person werewaiting to see whether the noise had awakened me. Then I heard agentle creaking as the window was very slowly opened. I could standit no longer, for my nerves are not what they used to be. I sprangout of bed and flung open the shutters. A man was crouching at thewindow. I could see little of him, for he was gone like a flash. Hewas wrapped in some sort of cloak which came across the lower part ofhis face. One thing only I am sure of, and that is that he had someweapon in his hand. It looked to me like a long knife. I distinctlysaw the gleam of it as he turned to run."
"This is most interesting," said Holmes. "Pray what did you do then?"
"I should have followed him through the open window if I had beenstronger. As it was, I rang the bell and roused the house. It took mesome little time, for the bell rings in the kitchen and the servantsall sleep upstairs. I shouted, however, and that brought Joseph down,and he roused the others. Joseph and the groom found marks on the bedoutside the window, but the weather has been so dry lately that theyfound it hopeless to follow the trail across the grass. There's aplace, however, on the wooden fence which skirts the road which showssigns, they tell me, as if some one had got over, and had snapped thetop of the rail in doing so. I have said nothing to the local policeyet, for I thought I had best have your opinion first."
This tale of our client's appeared to have an extraordinary effectupon Sherlock Holmes. He rose from his chair and paced about the roomin uncontrollable excitement.
"Misfortunes never come single," said Phelps, smiling, though it wasevident that his adventure had somewhat shaken him.
"You have certainly had your share," said Holmes. "Do you think youcould walk round the house with me?"
"Oh, yes, I should like a little sunshine. Joseph will come, too."
"And I also," said Miss Harrison.
"I am afraid not," said Holmes, shaking his head. "I think I must askyou to remain sitting exactly where you are."
The young lady resumed her seat with an air of displeasure. Herbrother, however, had joined us and we set off all four together. Wepassed round the lawn to the outside of the young diplomatist'swindow. There were, as he had said, marks upon the bed, but they werehopelessly blurred and vague. Holmes stopped over them for aninstant, and then rose shrugging his shoulders.
"I don't think any one could make much of this," said he. "Let us goround the house and see why this particular room was chose by theburglar. I should have thought those larger windows of thedrawing-room and dining-room would have had more attractions forhim."
"They are more visible from the road," suggested Mr. Joseph Harrison.
"Ah, yes, of course. There is a door here which he might haveattempted. What is it for?"
"It is the side entrance for trades-people. Of course it is locked atnight."
"Have you ever had an alarm like this before?"
"Never," said our client.
"Do you keep plate in the house, or anything to attract burglars?"
"Nothing of value."
Holmes strolled round the house with his hands in his pockets and anegligent air which was unusual with him.
"By the way," said he to Joseph Harrison, "you found some place, Iunderstand, where the fellow scaled the fence. Let us have a look atthat!"
The plump young man led us to a spot where the top of one of thewooden rails had been cracked. A small fragment of the wood washanging down. Holmes pulled it off and examined it critically.
"Do you think that was done last night? It looks rather old, does itnot?"
"Well, possibly so."
"There are no marks of any one jumping down upon the other side. No,I fancy we shall get no help here. Let us go back to the bedroom andtalk the matter over."
Percy Phelps was walking very slowly, leaning upon the arm of hisfuture brother-in-law. Holmes walked swiftly across the lawn, and wewere at the open window of the bedroom long before the others cameup.
"Miss Harrison," said Holmes, speaking with the utmost intensity ofmanner, "you must stay where you are all day. Let nothing prevent youfrom staying where you are all day. It is of the utmost importance."
"Certainly, if you wish it, Mr. Holmes," said the girl inastonishment.
"When you go to bed lock the door of this room on the outside andkeep the key. Promise to do this."
"But Percy?"
"He will come to London with us."
"And am I to remain here?"
"It is for his sake. You can serve him. Quick! Promise!"
She gave a quick nod of assent just as the other two came up.
"Why do you sit moping there, Annie?" cried her brother. "Come outinto the sunshine!"
"No, thank you, Joseph. I have a slight headache and this room isdeliciously cool and soothing."
"What do you propose now, Mr. Holmes?" asked our client.
"Well, in investigating this minor affair we must not lose sight ofour main inquiry. It would be a very great help to me if you wouldcome up to London with us."
"At once?"
"Well, as soon as you conveniently can. Say in an hour."
"I feel quite strong enough, if I can really be of any help."
"The greatest possible."
"Perhaps you would like me to stay there to-night?"
"I was just going to propose it."
"Then, if my friend of the night comes to revisit me, he will findthe bird flown. We are all in your hands, Mr. Holmes, and you musttell us exactly what you would like done. Perhaps you would preferthat Joseph came with us so as to look after me?"
"Oh, no; my friend Watson is a medical man, you know, and he'll lookafter you. We'll have our lunch here, if you will permit us, and thenwe shall all three set off for town together."
It was arranged as he suggested, though Miss Harrison excused herselffrom leaving the bedroom, in accordance with Holmes's suggestion.What the object of my friend's manoeuvres was I could not conceive,unless it were to keep the lady away from Phelps, who, rejoiced byhis returning health and by the prospect of action, lunched with usin the dining-room. Holmes had still more startling surprise for us,however, for, after accompanying us down to the station and seeing usinto our carriage, he calmly announced that he had no intention ofleaving Woking.
"There are one or two small points which I should desire to clear upbefore I go," said he. "Your absence, Mr. Phelps, will in some waysrather assist me. Watson, when you reach London you would oblige meby driving at once to Baker Street with our friend here, andremaining with him until I see you again. It is fortunate that youare old school-fellows, as you must have much to talk over. Mr.Phelps can have the spare bedroom to-night, and I will be with you intime for breakfast, for there is a train which will take me intoWaterloo at eight."
"But how about our investigation in London?" asked Phelps, ruefully.
"We can do that to-morrow. I think that just at present I can be ofmore immediate use here."
"You might tell them at Briarbrae that I hope to be back to-morrownight," cried Phelps, as we began to move from the platform.
"I hardly expect to go back to Briarbrae," answered Holmes, and wavedhis hand to us cheerily as we shot out from the station.
Phelps and I talked it over on our journey, but neither of us coulddevise a satisfactory reason for this new development.
"I suppose he wants to find out some clue as to the burglary lastnight, if a burglar it was. For myself, I don't believe it was anordinary thief."
"What is your own idea, then?"
"Upon my word, you may put it down to my weak nerves or not, but Ibelieve there is some deep political intrigue going on around me, andthat for some reason that passes my understanding my life is aimed atby the conspirators. It sounds high-flown and absurd, but considerthe facts! Why should a thief try to break in at a bedroom window,where there could be no hope of any plunder, and why should he comewith a long knife in his hand?"
"You are sure it was not a house-breaker's jimmy?"
"Oh, no, it was a knife. I saw the flash of the blade quitedistinctly."
"But why on earth should you be pursued with such animosity?"
"Ah, that is the question."
"Well, if Holmes takes the same view, that would account for hisaction, would it not? Presuming that your theory is correct, if hecan lay his hands upon the man who threatened you last night he willhave gone a long way towards finding who took the naval treaty. It isabsurd to suppose that you have two enemies, one of whom robs you,while the other threatens your life."
"But Holmes said that he was not going to Briarbrae."
"I have known him for some time," said I, "but I never knew him doanything yet without a very good reason," and with that ourconversation drifted off on to other topics.
But it was a weary day for me. Phelps was still weak after his longillness, and his misfortune made him querulous and nervous. In vain Iendeavored to interest him in Afghanistan, in India, in socialquestions, in anything which might take his mind out of the groove.He would always come back to his lost treaty, wondering, guessing,speculating, as to what Holmes was doing, what steps Lord Holdhurstwas taking, what news we should have in the morning. As the eveningwore on his excitement became quite painful.
"You have implicit faith in Holmes?" he asked.
"I have seen him do some remarkable things."
"But he never brought light into anything quite so dark as this?"
"Oh, yes, I have known him solve questions which presented fewerclues than yours."
"But not where such large interests are at stake?"
"I don't know that. To my certain knowledge he has acted on behalf ofthree of the reigning houses of Europe in very vital matters."
"But you know him well, Watson. He is such an inscrutable fellow thatI never quite know what to make of him. Do you think he is hopeful?Do you think he expects to make a success of it?"
"He has said nothing."
"That is a bad sign."
"On the contrary, I have noticed that when he is off the trail hegenerally says so. It is when he is on a scent and is not quiteabsolutely sure yet that it is the right one that he is mosttaciturn. Now, my dear fellow, we can't help matters by makingourselves nervous about them, so let me implore you to go to bed andso be fresh for whatever may await us to-morrow."
I was able at last to persuade my companion to take my advice, thoughI knew from his excited manner that there was not much hope of sleepfor him. Indeed, his mood was infectious, for I lay tossing half thenight myself, brooding over this strange problem, and inventing ahundred theories, each of which was more impossible than the last.Why had Holmes remained at Woking? Why had he asked Miss Harrison toremain in the sick-room all day? Why had he been so careful not toinform the people at Briarbrae that he intended to remain near them?I cudgelled my brains until I fell asleep in the endeavor to findsome explanation which would cover all these facts.
It was seven o'clock when I awoke, and I set off at once for Phelps'sroom, to find him haggard and spent after a sleepless night. Hisfirst question was whether Holmes had arrived yet.
"He'll be here when he promised," said I, "and not an instant sooneror later."
And my words were true, for shortly after eight a hansom dashed up tothe door and our friend got out of it. Standing in the window we sawthat his left hand was swathed in a bandage and that his face wasvery grim and pale. He entered the house, but it was some little timebefore he came upstairs.
"He looks like a beaten man," cried Phelps.
I was forced to confess that he was right. "After all," said I, "theclue of the matter lies probably here in town."
Phelps gave a groan.
"I don't know how it is," said he, "but I had hoped for so much fromhis return. But surely his hand was not tied up like that yesterday.What can be the matter?"
"You are not wounded, Holmes?" I asked, as my friend entered theroom.
"Tut, it is only a scratch through my own clumsiness," he answered,nodding his good-mornings to us. "This case of yours, Mr. Phelps, iscertainly one of the darkest which I have ever investigated."
"I feared that you would find it beyond you."
"It has been a most remarkable experience."
"That bandage tells of adventures," said I. "Won't you tell us whathas happened?"
"After breakfast, my dear Watson. Remember that I have breathedthirty miles of Surrey air this morning. I suppose that there hasbeen no answer from my cabman advertisement? Well, well, we cannotexpect to score every time."
The table was all laid, and just as I was about to ring Mrs. Hudsonentered with the tea and coffee. A few minutes later she brought inthree covers, and we all drew up to the table, Holmes ravenous, Icurious, and Phelps in the gloomiest state of depression.
"Mrs. Hudson has risen to the occasion," said Holmes, uncovering adish of curried chicken. "Her cuisine is a little limited, but shehas as good an idea of breakfast as a Scotch-woman. What have youhere, Watson?"
"Ham and eggs," I answered.
"Good! What are you going to take, Mr. Phelps--curried fowl or eggs,or will you help yourself?"
"Thank you. I can eat nothing," said Phelps.
"Oh, come! Try the dish before you."
"Thank you, I would really rather not."
"Well, then," said Holmes, with a mischievous twinkle, "I supposethat you have no objection to helping me?"
Phelps raised the cover, and as he did so he uttered a scream, andsat there staring with a face as white as the plate upon which helooked. Across the centre of it was lying a little cylinder ofblue-gray paper. He caught it up, devoured it with his eyes, and thendanced madly about the room, passing it to his bosom and shriekingout in his delight. Then he fell back into an arm-chair so limp andexhausted with his own emotions that we had to pour brandy down histhroat to keep him from fainting.
"There! there!" said Holmes, soothing, patting him upon the shoulder."It was too bad to spring it on you like this, but Watson here willtell you that I never can resist a touch of the dramatic."
Phelps seized his hand and kissed it. "God bless you!" he cried. "Youhave saved my honor."
"Well, my own was at stake, you know," said Holmes. "I assure you itis just as hateful to me to fail in a case as it can be to you toblunder over a commission."
Phelps thrust away the precious document into the innermost pocket ofhis coat.
"I have not the heart to interrupt your breakfast any further, andyet I am dying to know how you got it and where it was."
Sherlock Holmes swallowed a cup of coffee, and turned his attentionto the ham and eggs. Then he rose, lit his pipe, and settled himselfdown into his chair.
"I'll tell you what I did first, and how I came to do it afterwards,"said he. "After leaving you at the station I went for a charming walkthrough some admirable Surrey scenery to a pretty little villagecalled Ripley, where I had my tea at an inn, and took the precautionof filling my flask and of putting a paper of sandwiches in mypocket. There I remained until evening, when I set off for Wokingagain, and found myself in the high-road outside Briarbrae just aftersunset.
"Well, I waited until the road was clear--it is never a veryfrequented one at any time, I fancy--and then I clambered over thefence into the grounds."
"Surely the gate was open!" ejaculated Phelps.
"Yes, but I have a peculiar taste in these matters. I chose the placewhere the three fir-trees stand, and behind their screen I got overwithout the least chance of any one in the house being able to seeme. I crouched down among the bushes on the other side, and crawledfrom one to the other--witness the disreputable state of my trouserknees--until I had reached the clump of rhododendrons just oppositeto your bedroom window. There I squatted down and awaiteddevelopments.
"The blind was not down in your room, and I could see Miss Harrisonsitting there reading by the table. It was quarter-past ten when sheclosed her book, fastened the shutters, and retired.
"I heard her shut the door, and felt quite sure that she had turnedthe key in the lock."
"The key!" ejaculated Phelps.
"Yes, I had given Miss Harrison instructions to lock the door on theoutside and take the key with her when she went to bed. She carriedout every one of my injunctions to the letter, and certainly withouther cooperation you would not have that paper in you coat-pocket. Shedeparted then and the lights went out, and I was left squatting inthe rhododendron-bush.
"The night was fine, but still it was a very weary vigil. Of courseit has the sort of excitement about it that the sportsman feels whenhe lies beside the water-course and waits for the big game. It wasvery long, though--almost as long, Watson, as when you and I waitedin that deadly room when we looked into the little problem of theSpeckled Band. There was a church-clock down at Woking which struckthe quarters, and I thought more than once that it had stopped. Atlast however about two in the morning, I suddenly heard the gentlesound of a bolt being pushed back and the creaking of a key. A momentlater the servant's door was opened, and Mr. Joseph Harrison steppedout into the moonlight."
"Joseph!" ejaculated Phelps.
"He was bare-headed, but he had a black coat thrown over his shoulderso that he could conceal his face in an instant if there were anyalarm. He walked on tiptoe under the shadow of the wall, and when hereached the window he worked a long-bladed knife through the sash andpushed back the catch. Then he flung open the window, and putting hisknife through the crack in the shutters, he thrust the bar up andswung them open.
"From where I lay I had a perfect view of the inside of the room andof every one of his movements. He lit the two candles which stoodupon the mantelpiece, and then he proceeded to turn back the cornerof the carpet in the neighborhood of the door. Presently he stoppedand picked out a square piece of board, such as is usually left toenable plumbers to get at the joints of the gas-pipes. This onecovered, as a matter of fact, the T joint which gives off the pipewhich supplies the kitchen underneath. Out of this hiding-place hedrew that little cylinder of paper, pushed down the board, rearrangedthe carpet, blew out the candles, and walked straight into my arms asI stood waiting for him outside the window.
"Well, he has rather more viciousness than I gave him credit for, hasMaster Joseph. He flew at me with his knife, and I had to grasp himtwice, and got a cut over the knuckles, before I had the upper handof him. He looked murder out of the only eye he could see with whenwe had finished, but he listened to reason and gave up the papers.Having got them I let my man go, but I wired full particulars toForbes this morning. If he is quick enough to catch his bird, welland good. But if, as I shrewdly suspect, he finds the nest emptybefore he gets there, why, all the better for the government. I fancythat Lord Holdhurst for one, and Mr. Percy Phelps for another, wouldvery much rather that the affair never got as far as a police-court.
"My God!" gasped our client. "Do you tell me that during these longten weeks of agony the stolen papers were within the very room withme all the time?"
"So it was."
"And Joseph! Joseph a villain and a thief!"
"Hum! I am afraid Joseph's character is a rather deeper and moredangerous one than one might judge from his appearance. From what Ihave heard from him this morning, I gather that he has lost heavilyin dabbling with stocks, and that he is ready to do anything on earthto better his fortunes. Being an absolutely selfish man, when achance presented itself he did not allow either his sister'shappiness or your reputation to hold his hand."
Percy Phelps sank back in his chair. "My head whirls," said he. "Yourwords have dazed me."
"The principal difficulty in your case," remarked Holmes, in hisdidactic fashion, "lay in the fact of there being too much evidence.What was vital was overlaid and hidden by what was irrelevant. Of allthe facts which were presented to us we had to pick just those whichwe deemed to be essential, and then piece them together in theirorder, so as to reconstruct this very remarkable chain of events. Ihad already begun to suspect Joseph, from the fact that you hadintended to travel home with him that night, and that therefore itwas a likely enough thing that he should call for you, knowing theForeign Office well, upon his way. When I heard that some one hadbeen so anxious to get into the bedroom, in which no one but Josephcould have concealed anything--you told us in your narrative how youhad turned Joseph out when you arrived with the doctor--my suspicionsall changed to certainties, especially as the attempt was made on thefirst night upon which the nurse was absent, showing that theintruder was well acquainted with the ways of the house."
"How blind I have been!"
"The facts of the case, as far as I have worked them out, are these:this Joseph Harrison entered the office through the Charles Streetdoor, and knowing his way he walked straight into your room theinstant after you left it. Finding no one there he promptly rang thebell, and at the instant that he did so his eyes caught the paperupon the table. A glance showed him that chance had put in his way aState document of immense value, and in an instant he had thrust itinto his pocket and was gone. A few minutes elapsed, as you remember,before the sleepy commissionaire drew your attention to the bell, andthose were just enough to give the thief time to make his escape.
"He made his way to Woking by the first train, and having examinedhis booty and assured himself that it really was of immense value, hehad concealed it in what he thought was a very safe place, with theintention of taking it out again in a day or two, and carrying it tothe French embassy, or wherever he thought that a long price was tobe had. Then came your sudden return. He, without a moment's warning,was bundled out of his room, and from that time onward there werealways at least two of you there to prevent him from regaining histreasure. The situation to him must have been a maddening one. But atlast he thought he saw his chance. He tried to steal in, but wasbaffled by your wakefulness. You remember that you did not take yourusual draught that night."
"I remember."
"I fancy that he had taken steps to make that draught efficacious,and that he quite relied upon your being unconscious. Of course, Iunderstood that he would repeat the attempt whenever it could be donewith safety. Your leaving the room gave him the chance he wanted. Ikept Miss Harrison in it all day so that he might not anticipate us.Then, having given him the idea that the coast was clear, I keptguard as I have described. I already knew that the papers wereprobably in the room, but I had no desire to rip up all the plankingand skirting in search of them. I let him take them, therefore, fromthe hiding-place, and so saved myself an infinity of trouble. Isthere any other point which I can make clear?"
"Why did he try the window on the first occasion," I asked, "when hemight have entered by the door?"
"In reaching the door he would have to pass seven bedrooms. On theother hand, he could get out on to the lawn with ease. Anythingelse?"
"You do not think," asked Phelps, "that he had any murderousintention? The knife was only meant as a tool."
"It may be so," answered Holmes, shrugging his shoulders. "I can onlysay for certain that Mr. Joseph Harrison is a gentleman to whosemercy I should be extremely unwilling to trust."





                           THE FINAL PROBLEM
It is with a heavy heart that I take up my pen to write these thelast words in which I shall ever record the singular gifts by whichmy friend Mr. Sherlock Holmes was distinguished.  In an incoherentand, as I deeply feel, an entirely inadequate fashion, I haveendeavored to give some account of my strange experiences in hiscompany from the chance which first brought us together at the periodof the "Study in Scarlet," up to the time of his interference in thematter of the "Naval Treaty"--an interference which had theunquestionable effect of preventing a serious internationalcomplication.  It was my intention to have stopped there, and to havesaid nothing of that event which has created a void in my life whichthe lapse of two years has done little to fill.  My hand has beenforced, however, by the recent letters in which Colonel JamesMoriarty defends the memory of his brother, and I have no choice butto lay the facts before the public exactly as they occurred.  I aloneknow the absolute truth of the matter, and I am satisfied that thetime has come when no good purpose is to be served by itssuppression.  As far as I know, there have been only three accountsin the public press:  that in the Journal de Genve on May 6th, 1891,the Reuter's despatch in the English papers on May 7th, and finallythe recent letters to which I have alluded.  Of these the first andsecond were extremely condensed, while the last is, as I shall nowshow, an absolute perversion of the facts.  It lies with me to tellfor the first time what really took place between Professor Moriartyand Mr. Sherlock Holmes.
It may be remembered that after my marriage, and my subsequent startin private practice, the very intimate relations which had existedbetween Holmes and myself became to some extent modified.  He stillcame to me from time to time when he desired a companion in hisinvestigation, but these occasions grew more and more seldom, until Ifind that in the year 1890 there were only three cases of which Iretain any record.  During the winter of that year and the earlyspring of 1891, I saw in the papers that he had been engaged by theFrench government upon a matter of supreme importance, and I receivedtwo notes from Holmes, dated from Narbonne and from Nimes, from whichI gathered that his stay in France was likely to be a long one.  Itwas with some surprise, therefore, that I saw him walk into myconsulting-room upon the evening of April 24th.  It struck me that hewas looking even paler and thinner than usual.
"Yes, I have been using myself up rather too freely," he remarked, inanswer to my look rather than to my words; "I have been a littlepressed of late.  Have you any objection to my closing yourshutters?"
The only light in the room came from the lamp upon the table at whichI had been reading.  Holmes edged his way round the wall and flingingthe shutters together, he bolted them securely.
"You are afraid of something?" I asked.
"Well, I am."
"Of what?"
"Of air-guns."
"My dear Holmes, what do you mean?"
"I think that you know me well enough, Watson, to understand that Iam by no means a nervous man.  At the same time, it is stupidityrather than courage to refuse to recognize danger when it is closeupon you.  Might I trouble you for a match?"  He drew in the smoke ofhis cigarette as if the soothing influence was grateful to him.
"I must apologize for calling so late," said he, "and I must furtherbeg you to be so unconventional as to allow me to leave your housepresently by scrambling over your back garden wall."
"But what does it all mean?" I asked.
He held out his hand, and I saw in the light of the lamp that two ofhis knuckles were burst and bleeding.
"It is not an airy nothing, you see," said he, smiling.  "On thecontrary, it is solid enough for a man to break his hand over.  IsMrs. Watson in?"
"She is away upon a visit."
"Indeed!  You are alone?"
"Quite."
"Then it makes it the easier for me to propose that you should comeaway with me for a week to the Continent."
"Where?"
"Oh, anywhere.  It's all the same to me."
There was something very strange in all this.  It was not Holmes'snature to take an aimless holiday, and something about his pale, wornface told me that his nerves were at their highest tension.  He sawthe question in my eyes, and, putting his finger-tips together andhis elbows upon his knees, he explained the situation.
"You have probably never heard of Professor Moriarty?" said he.
"Never."
"Aye, there's the genius and the wonder of the thing!" he cried. "The man pervades London, and no one has heard of him.  That's whatputs him on a pinnacle in the records of crime.  I tell you, Watson,in all seriousness, that if I could beat that man, if I could freesociety of him, I should feel that my own career had reached itssummit, and I should be prepared to turn to some more placid line inlife.  Between ourselves, the recent cases in which I have been ofassistance to the royal family of Scandinavia, and to the Frenchrepublic, have left me in such a position that I could continue tolive in the quiet fashion which is most congenial to me, and toconcentrate my attention upon my chemical researches.  But I couldnot rest, Watson, I could not sit quiet in my chair, if I thoughtthat such a man as Professor Moriarty were walking the streets ofLondon unchallenged."
"What has he done, then?"
"His career has been an extraordinary one.  He is a man of good birthand excellent education, endowed by nature with a phenomenalmathematical faculty.  At the age of twenty-one he wrote a treatiseupon the Binomial Theorem, which has had a European vogue.  On thestrength of it he won the Mathematical Chair at one of our smalleruniversities, and had, to all appearance, a most brilliant careerbefore him.  But the man had hereditary tendencies of the mostdiabolical kind.  A criminal strain ran in his blood, which, insteadof being modified, was increased and rendered infinitely moredangerous by his extraordinary mental powers.  Dark rumors gatheredround him in the university town, and eventually he was compelled toresign his chair and to come down to London, where he set up as anarmy coach.  So much is known to the world, but what I am telling younow is what I have myself discovered.
"As you are aware, Watson, there is no one who knows the highercriminal world of London so well as I do.  For years past I havecontinually been conscious of some power behind the malefactor, somedeep organizing power which forever stands in the way of the law, andthrows its shield over the wrong-doer.  Again and again in cases ofthe most varying sorts--forgery cases, robberies, murders--I havefelt the presence of this force, and I have deduced its action inmany of those undiscovered crimes in which I have not been personallyconsulted.  For years I have endeavored to break through the veilwhich shrouded it, and at last the time came when I seized my threadand followed it, until it led me, after a thousand cunning windings,to ex-Professor Moriarty of mathematical celebrity.
"He is the Napoleon of crime, Watson.  He is the organizer of halfthat is evil and of nearly all that is undetected in this great city. He is a genius, a philosopher, an abstract thinker.  He has a brainof the first order.  He sits motionless, like a spider in the centerof its web, but that web has a thousand radiations, and he knows wellevery quiver of each of them.  He does little himself.  He onlyplans.  But his agents are numerous and splendidly organized.  Isthere a crime to be done, a paper to be abstracted, we will say, ahouse to be rifled, a man to be removed--the word is passed to theProfessor, the matter is organized and carried out.  The agent may becaught.  In that case money is found for his bail or his defence. But the central power which uses the agent is never caught--never somuch as suspected.  This was the organization which I deduced,Watson, and which I devoted my whole energy to exposing and breakingup.
"But the Professor was fenced round with safeguards so cunninglydevised that, do what I would, it seemed impossible to get evidencewhich would convict in a court of law.  You know my powers, my dearWatson, and yet at the end of three months I was forced to confessthat I had at last met an antagonist who was my intellectual equal. My horror at his crimes was lost in my admiration at his skill.  Butat last he made a trip--only a little, little trip--but it was morethan he could afford when I was so close upon him.  I had my chance,and, starting from that point, I have woven my net round him untilnow it is all ready to close.  In three days--that is to say, onMonday next--matters will be ripe, and the Professor, with all theprincipal members of his gang, will be in the hands of the police. Then will come the greatest criminal trial of the century, theclearing up of over forty mysteries, and the rope for all of them;but if we move at all prematurely, you understand, they may slip outof our hands even at the last moment.
"Now, if I could have done this without the knowledge of ProfessorMoriarty, all would have been well.  But he was too wily for that. He saw every step which I took to draw my toils round him.  Again andagain he strove to break away, but I as often headed him off.  I tellyou, my friend, that if a detailed account of that silent contestcould be written, it would take its place as the most brilliant bitof thrust-and-parry work in the history of detection.  Never have Irisen to such a height, and never have I been so hard pressed by anopponent.  He cut deep, and yet I just undercut him.  This morningthe last steps were taken, and three days only were wanted tocomplete the business.  I was sitting in my room thinking the matterover, when the door opened and Professor Moriarty stood before me.
"My nerves are fairly proof, Watson, but I must confess to a startwhen I saw the very man who had been so much in my thoughts standingthere on my threshold.  His appearance was quite familiar to me.  Heis extremely tall and thin, his forehead domes out in a white curve,and his two eyes are deeply sunken in his head.  He is clean-shaven,pale, and ascetic-looking, retaining something of the professor inhis features.  His shoulders are rounded from much study, and hisface protrudes forward, and is forever slowly oscillating from sideto side in a curiously reptilian fashion.  He peered at me with greatcuriosity in his puckered eyes.
"'You have less frontal development that I should have expected,'said he, at last.  'It is a dangerous habit to finger loaded firearmsin the pocket of one's dressing-gown.'
"The fact is that upon his entrance I had instantly recognized theextreme personal danger in which I lay.  The only conceivable escapefor him lay in silencing my tongue.  In an instant I had slipped therevolver from the drawer into my pocket, and was covering him throughthe cloth.  At his remark I drew the weapon out and laid it cockedupon the table.  He still smiled and blinked, but there was somethingabout his eyes which made me feel very glad that I had it there.
"'You evidently don't know me,' said he.
"'On the contrary,' I answered, 'I think it is fairly evident that Ido.  Pray take a chair.  I can spare you five minutes if you haveanything to say.'
"'All that I have to say has already crossed your mind,' said he.
"'Then possibly my answer has crossed yours,' I replied.
"'You stand fast?'
"'Absolutely.'
"He clapped his hand into his pocket, and I raised the pistol fromthe table.  But he merely drew out a memorandum-book in which he hadscribbled some dates.
"'You crossed my path on the 4th of January,' said he.  'On the 23dyou incommoded me; by the middle of February I was seriouslyinconvenienced by you; at the end of March I was absolutely hamperedin my plans; and now, at the close of April, I find myself placed insuch a position through your continual persecution that I am inpositive danger of losing my liberty.  The situation is becoming animpossible one.'
"'Have you any suggestion to make?' I asked.
"'You must drop it, Mr. Holmes,' said he, swaying his face about. 'You really must, you know.'
"'After Monday,' said I.
"'Tut, tut,' said he.  'I am quite sure that a man of yourintelligence will see that there can be but one outcome to thisaffair.  It is necessary that you should withdraw.  You have workedthings in such a fashion that we have only one resource left.  It hasbeen an intellectual treat to me to see the way in which you havegrappled with this affair, and I say, unaffectedly, that it would bea grief to me to be forced to take any extreme measure.  You smile,sir, but I assure you that it really would.'
"'Danger is part of my trade,' I remarked.
"'That is not danger,' said he.  'It is inevitable destruction.  Youstand in the way not merely of an individual, but of a mightyorganization, the full extent of which you, with all your cleverness,have been unable to realize.  You must stand clear, Mr. Holmes, or betrodden under foot.'
"'I am afraid,' said I, rising, 'that in the pleasure of thisconversation I am neglecting business of importance which awaits meelsewhere.'
"He rose also and looked at me in silence, shaking his head sadly.
"'Well, well,' said he, at last.  'It seems a pity, but I have donewhat I could.  I know every move of your game.  You can do nothingbefore Monday.  It has been a duel between you and me, Mr. Holmes. You hope to place me in the dock.  I tell you that I will never standin the dock.  You hope to beat me.  I tell you that you will neverbeat me.  If you are clever enough to bring destruction upon me, restassured that I shall do as much to you.'
"'You have paid me several compliments, Mr. Moriarty,' said I.  'Letme pay you one in return when I say that if I were assured of theformer eventuality I would, in the interests of the public,cheerfully accept the latter.'
"'I can promise you the one, but not the other,' he snarled, and soturned his rounded back upon me, and went peering and blinking out ofthe room.
"That was my singular interview with Professor Moriarty.  I confessthat it left an unpleasant effect upon my mind.  His soft, precisefashion of speech leaves a conviction of sincerity which a mere bullycould not produce.  Of course, you will say:  'Why not take policeprecautions against him?'  the reason is that I am well convincedthat it is from his agents the blow would fall.  I have the bestproofs that it would be so."
"You have already been assaulted?"
"My dear Watson, Professor Moriarty is not a man who lets the grassgrow under his feet.  I went out about mid-day to transact somebusiness in Oxford Street.  As I passed the corner which leads fromBentinck Street on to the Welbeck Street crossing a two-horse vanfuriously driven whizzed round and was on me like a flash.  I sprangfor the foot-path and saved myself by the fraction of a second.  Thevan dashed round by Marylebone Lane and was gone in an instant.  Ikept to the pavement after that, Watson, but as I walked down VereStreet a brick came down from the roof of one of the houses, and wasshattered to fragments at my feet.  I called the police and had theplace examined.  There were slates and bricks piled up on the roofpreparatory to some repairs, and they would have me believe that thewind had toppled over one of these.  Of course I knew better, but Icould prove nothing.  I took a cab after that and reached mybrother's rooms in Pall Mall, where I spent the day.  Now I have comeround to you, and on my way I was attacked by a rough with abludgeon.  I knocked him down, and the police have him in custody;but I can tell you with the most absolute confidence that no possibleconnection will ever be traced between the gentleman upon whose frontteeth I have barked my knuckles and the retiring mathematical coach,who is, I dare say, working out problems upon a black-board ten milesaway.  You will not wonder, Watson, that my first act on enteringyour rooms was to close your shutters, and that I have been compelledto ask your permission to leave the house by some less conspicuousexit than the front door."
I had often admired my friend's courage, but never more than now, ashe sat quietly checking off a series of incidents which must havecombined to make up a day of horror.
"You will spend the night here?" I said.
"No, my friend, you might find me a dangerous guest.  I have my planslaid, and all will be well.  Matters have gone so far now that theycan move without my help as far as the arrest goes, though mypresence is necessary for a conviction.  It is obvious, therefore,that I cannot do better than get away for the few days which remainbefore the police are at liberty to act.  It would be a greatpleasure to me, therefore, if you could come on to the Continent withme."
"The practice is quiet," said I, "and I have an accommodatingneighbor.  I should be glad to come."
"And to start to-morrow morning?"
"If necessary."
"Oh yes, it is most necessary.  Then these are your instructions, andI beg, my dear Watson, that you will obey them to the letter, for youare now playing a double-handed game with me against the cleverestrogue and the most powerful syndicate of criminals in Europe.  Nowlisten!  You will dispatch whatever luggage you intend to take by atrusty messenger unaddressed to Victoria to-night.  In the morningyou will send for a hansom, desiring your man to take neither thefirst nor the second which may present itself.  Into this hansom youwill jump, and you will drive to the Strand end of the LowtherArcade, handing the address to the cabman upon a slip of paper, witha request that he will not throw it away.  Have your fare ready, andthe instant that your cab stops, dash through the Arcade, timingyourself to reach the other side at a quarter-past nine.  You willfind a small brougham waiting close to the curb, driven by a fellowwith a heavy black cloak tipped at the collar with red.  Into thisyou will step, and you will reach Victoria in time for theContinental express."
"Where shall I meet you?"
"At the station.  The second first-class carriage from the front willbe reserved for us."
"The carriage is our rendezvous, then?"
"Yes."
It was in vain that I asked Holmes to remain for the evening.  It wasevident to me that he thought he might bring trouble to the roof hewas under, and that that was the motive which impelled him to go. With a few hurried words as to our plans for the morrow he rose andcame out with me into the garden, clambering over the wall whichleads into Mortimer Street, and immediately whistling for a hansom,in which I heard him drive away.
In the morning I obeyed Holmes's injunctions to the letter.  A hansomwas procured with such precaution as would prevent its being onewhich was placed ready for us, and I drove immediately afterbreakfast to the Lowther Arcade, through which I hurried at the topof my speed.  A brougham was waiting with a very massive driverwrapped in a dark cloak, who, the instant that I had stepped in,whipped up the horse and rattled off to Victoria Station.  On myalighting there he turned the carriage, and dashed away again withoutso much as a look in my direction.
So far all had gone admirably.  My luggage was waiting for me, and Ihad no difficulty in finding the carriage which Holmes had indicated,the less so as it was the only one in the train which was marked"Engaged."  My only source of anxiety now was the non-appearance ofHolmes.  The station clock marked only seven minutes from the timewhen we were due to start.  In vain I searched among the groups oftravellers and leave-takers for the lithe figure of my friend.  Therewas no sign of him.  I spent a few minutes in assisting a venerableItalian priest, who was endeavoring to make a porter understand, inhis broken English, that his luggage was to be booked through toParis.  Then, having taken another look round, I returned to mycarriage, where I found that the porter, in spite of the ticket, hadgiven me my decrepit Italian friend as a traveling companion.  It wasuseless for me to explain to him that his presence was an intrusion,for my Italian was even more limited than his English, so I shruggedmy shoulders resignedly, and continued to look out anxiously for myfriend.  A chill of fear had come over me, as I thought that hisabsence might mean that some blow had fallen during the night. Already the doors had all been shut and the whistle blown, when--
"My dear Watson," said a voice, "you have not even condescended tosay good-morning."
I turned in uncontrollable astonishment.  The aged ecclesiastic hadturned his face towards me.  For an instant the wrinkles weresmoothed away, the nose drew away from the chin, the lower lip ceasedto protrude and the mouth to mumble, the dull eyes regained theirfire, the drooping figure expanded.  The next the whole framecollapsed again, and Holmes had gone as quickly as he had come.
"Good heavens!" I cried; "how you startled me!"
"Every precaution is still necessary," he whispered.  "I have reasonto think that they are hot upon our trail.  Ah, there is Moriartyhimself."
The train had already begun to move as Holmes spoke.  Glancing back,I saw a tall man pushing his way furiously through the crowd, andwaving his hand as if he desired to have the train stopped.  It wastoo late, however, for we were rapidly gathering momentum, and aninstant later had shot clear of the station.
"With all our precautions, you see that we have cut it rather fine,"said Holmes, laughing.  He rose, and throwing off the black cassockand hat which had formed his disguise, he packed them away in ahand-bag.
"Have you seen the morning paper, Watson?"
"No."
"You haven't seen about Baker Street, then?"
"Baker Street?"
"They set fire to our rooms last night.  No great harm was done."
"Good heavens, Holmes, this is intolerable!"
"They must have lost my track completely after their bludgeon-man wasarrested.  Otherwise they could not have imagined that I had returnedto my rooms.  They have evidently taken the precaution of watchingyou, however, and that is what has brought Moriarty to Victoria.  Youcould not have made any slip in coming?"
"I did exactly what you advised."
"Did you find your brougham?"
"Yes, it was waiting."
"Did you recognize your coachman?"
"No."
"It was my brother Mycroft.  It is an advantage to get about in sucha case without taking a mercenary into your confidence.  But we mustplan what we are to do about Moriarty now."
"As this is an express, and as the boat runs in connection with it, Ishould think we have shaken him off very effectively."
"My dear Watson, you evidently did not realize my meaning when I saidthat this man may be taken as being quite on the same intellectualplane as myself.  You do not imagine that if I were the pursuer Ishould allow myself to be baffled by so slight an obstacle.  Why,then, should you think so meanly of him?"
"What will he do?"
"What I should do."
"What would you do, then?"
"Engage a special."
"But it must be late."
"By no means.  This train stops at Canterbury; and there is always atleast a quarter of an hour's delay at the boat.  He will catch usthere."
"One would think that we were the criminals.  Let us have himarrested on his arrival."
"It would be to ruin the work of three months.  We should get the bigfish, but the smaller would dart right and left out of the net.  OnMonday we should have them all.  No, an arrest is inadmissible."
"What then?"
"We shall get out at Canterbury."
"And then?"
"Well, then we must make a cross-country journey to Newhaven, and soover to Dieppe.  Moriarty will again do what I should do.  He willget on to Paris, mark down our luggage, and wait for two days at thedepot.  In the meantime we shall treat ourselves to a couple ofcarpet-bags, encourage the manufactures of the countries throughwhich we travel, and make our way at our leisure into Switzerland,via Luxembourg and Basle."
At Canterbury, therefore, we alighted, only to find that we shouldhave to wait an hour before we could get a train to Newhaven.
I was still looking rather ruefully after the rapidly disappearingluggage-van which contained my wardrobe, when Holmes pulled my sleeveand pointed up the line.
"Already, you see," said he.
Far away, from among the Kentish woods there rose a thin spray ofsmoke.  A minute later a carriage and engine could be seen flyingalong the open curve which leads to the station.  We had hardly timeto take our place behind a pile of luggage when it passed with arattle and a roar, beating a blast of hot air into our faces.
"There he goes," said Holmes, as we watched the carriage swing androck over the point. "There are limits, you see, to our friend'sintelligence.  It would have been a coup-de-matre had he deducedwhat I would deduce and acted accordingly."
"And what would he have done had he overtaken us?"
"There cannot be the least doubt that he would have made a murderousattack upon me.  It is, however, a game at which two may play.  Thequestion now is whether we should take a premature lunch here, or runour chance of starving before we reach the buffet at Newhaven."
We made our way to Brussels that night and spent two days there,moving on upon the third day as far as Strasburg.  On the Mondaymorning Holmes had telegraphed to the London police, and in theevening we found a reply waiting for us at our hotel.  Holmes tore itopen, and then with a bitter curse hurled it into the grate.
"I might have known it!" he groaned.  "He has escaped!"
"Moriarty?"
"They have secured the whole gang with the exception of him.  He hasgiven them the slip.  Of course, when I had left the country therewas no one to cope with him.  But I did think that I had put the gamein their hands.  I think that you had better return to England,Watson."
"Why?"
"Because you will find me a dangerous companion now.  This man'soccupation is gone.  He is lost if he returns to London.  If I readhis character right he will devote his whole energies to revenginghimself upon me.  He said as much in our short interview, and I fancythat he meant it.  I should certainly recommend you to return to yourpractice."
It was hardly an appeal to be successful with one who was an oldcampaigner as well as an old friend.  We sat in the Strasbourgsalle--manger arguing the question for half an hour, but the samenight we had resumed our journey and were well on our way to Geneva.
For a charming week we wandered up the Valley of the Rhone, and then,branching off at Leuk, we made our way over the Gemmi Pass, stilldeep in snow, and so, by way of Interlaken, to Meiringen.  It was alovely trip, the dainty green of the spring below, the virgin whiteof the winter above; but it was clear to me that never for oneinstant did Holmes forget the shadow which lay across him.  In thehomely Alpine villages or in the lonely mountain passes, I could tellby his quick glancing eyes and his sharp scrutiny of every face thatpassed us, that he was well convinced that, walk where we would, wecould not walk ourselves clear of the danger which was dogging ourfootsteps.
Once, I remember, as we passed over the Gemmi, and walked along theborder of the melancholy Daubensee, a large rock which had beendislodged from the ridge upon our right clattered down and roaredinto the lake behind us.  In an instant Holmes had raced up on to theridge, and, standing upon a lofty pinnacle, craned his neck in everydirection.  It was in vain that our guide assured him that a fall ofstones was a common chance in the spring-time at that spot.  He saidnothing, but he smiled at me with the air of a man who sees thefulfillment of that which he had expected.
And yet for all his watchfulness he was never depressed.  On thecontrary, I can never recollect having seen him in such exuberantspirits.  Again and again he recurred to the fact that if he could beassured that society was freed from Professor Moriarty he wouldcheerfully bring his own career to a conclusion.
"I think that I may go so far as to say, Watson, that I have notlived wholly in vain," he remarked.  "If my record were closedto-night I could still survey it with equanimity.  The air of Londonis the sweeter for my presence.  In over a thousand cases I am notaware that I have ever used my powers upon the wrong side.  Of late Ihave been tempted to look into the problems furnished by naturerather than those more superficial ones for which our artificialstate of society is responsible.  Your memoirs will draw to an end,Watson, upon the day that I crown my career by the capture orextinction of the most dangerous and capable criminal in Europe."
I shall be brief, and yet exact, in the little which remains for meto tell.  It is not a subject on which I would willingly dwell, andyet I am conscious that a duty devolves upon me to omit no detail.
It was on the third of May that we reached the little village ofMeiringen, where we put up at the Englischer Hof, then kept by PeterSteiler the elder.  Our landlord was an intelligent  man, and spokeexcellent English, having served for three years as waiter at theGrosvenor Hotel in London.  At his advice, on the afternoon of thefourth we set off together, with the intention of crossing the hillsand spending the night at the hamlet of Rosenlaui.  We had strictinjunctions, however, on no account to pass the falls of Reichenbach,which are about half-way up the hill, without making a small detourto see them.
It is, indeed, a fearful place.  The torrent, swollen by the meltingsnow, plunges into a tremendous abyss, from which the spray rolls uplike the smoke from a burning house.  The shaft into which the riverhurls itself is an immense chasm, lined by glistening coal-blackrock, and narrowing into a creaming, boiling pit of incalculabledepth, which brims over and shoots the stream onward over its jaggedlip.  The long sweep of green water roaring forever down, and thethick flickering curtain of spray hissing forever upward, turn a mangiddy with their constant whirl and clamor.  We stood near the edgepeering down at the gleam of the breaking water far below us againstthe black rocks, and listening to the half-human shout which camebooming up with the spray out of the abyss.
The path has been cut half-way round the fall to afford a completeview, but it ends abruptly, and the traveler has to return as hecame.  We had turned to do so, when we saw a Swiss lad come runningalong it with a letter in his hand.  It bore the mark of the hotelwhich we had just left, and was addressed to me by the landlord.  Itappeared that within a very few minutes of our leaving, an Englishlady had arrived who was in the last stage of consumption.  She hadwintered at Davos Platz, and was journeying now to join her friendsat Lucerne, when a sudden hemorrhage had overtaken her.  It wasthought that she could hardly live a few hours, but it would be agreat consolation to her to see an English doctor, and, if I wouldonly return, etc.  The good Steiler assured me in a postscript thathe would himself look upon my compliance as a very great favor, sincethe lady absolutely refused to see a Swiss physician, and he couldnot but feel that he was incurring a great responsibility.
The appeal was one which could not be ignored.  It was impossible torefuse the request of a fellow-countrywoman dying in a strange land. Yet I had my scruples about leaving Holmes.  It was finally agreed,however, that he should retain the young Swiss messenger with him asguide and companion while I returned to Meiringen.  My friend wouldstay some little time at the fall, he said, and would then walkslowly over the hill to Rosenlaui, where I was to rejoin him in theevening.  As I turned away I saw Holmes, with his back against a rockand his arms folded, gazing down at the rush of the waters.  It wasthe last that I was ever destined to see of him in this world.
When I was near the bottom of the descent I looked back.  It wasimpossible, from that position, to see the fall, but I could see thecurving path which winds over the shoulder of the hill and leads toit.  Along this a man was, I remember, walking very rapidly.
I could see his black figure clearly outlined against the greenbehind him.  I noted him, and the energy with which he walked but hepassed from my mind again as I hurried on upon my errand.
It may have been a little over an hour before I reached Meiringen. Old Steiler was standing at the porch of his hotel.
"Well," said I, as I came hurrying up, "I trust that she is noworse?"
A look of surprise passed over his face, and at the first quiver ofhis eyebrows my heart turned to lead in my breast.
"You did not write this?" I said, pulling the letter from my pocket. "There is no sick Englishwoman in the hotel?"
"Certainly not!" he cried.  "But it has the hotel mark upon it!  Ha,it must have been written by that tall Englishman who came in afteryou had gone.  He said--"
But I waited for none of the landlord's explanations.  In a tingle offear I was already running down the village street, and making forthe path which I had so lately descended.  It had taken me an hour tocome down.  For all my efforts two more had passed before I foundmyself at the fall of Reichenbach once more.  There was Holmes'sAlpine-stock still leaning against the rock by which I had left him. But there was no sign of him, and it was in vain that I shouted.  Myonly answer was my own voice reverberating in a rolling echo from thecliffs around me.
It was the sight of that Alpine-stock which turned me cold and sick. He had not gone to Rosenlaui, then.  He had remained on thatthree-foot path, with sheer wall on one side and sheer drop on theother, until his enemy had overtaken him.  The young Swiss had gonetoo.  He had probably been in the pay of Moriarty, and had left thetwo men together.  And then what had happened?  Who was to tell uswhat had happened then?
I stood for a minute or two to collect myself, for I was dazed withthe horror of the thing.  Then I began to think of Holmes's ownmethods and to try to practise them in reading this tragedy.  It was,alas, only too easy to do.  During our conversation we had not goneto the end of the path, and the Alpine-stock marked the place wherewe had stood.  The blackish soil is kept forever soft by theincessant drift of spray, and a bird would leave its tread upon it. Two lines of footmarks were clearly marked along the farther end ofthe path, both leading away from me.  There were none returning.  Afew yards from the end the soil was all ploughed up into a patch ofmud, and the branches and ferns which fringed the chasm were torn andbedraggled.  I lay upon my face and peered over with the sprayspouting up all around me.  It had darkened since I left, and now Icould only see here and there the glistening of moisture upon theblack walls, and far away down at the end of the shaft the gleam ofthe broken water.  I shouted; but only the same half-human cry of thefall was borne back to my ears.
But it was destined that I should after all have a last word ofgreeting from my friend and comrade.  I have said that hisAlpine-stock had been left leaning against a rock which jutted on tothe path.  From the top of this boulder the gleam of something brightcaught my eye, and, raising my hand, I found that it came from thesilver cigarette-case which he used to carry.  As I took it up asmall square of paper upon which it had lain fluttered down on to theground.  Unfolding it, I found that it consisted of three pages tornfrom his note-book and addressed to me.  It was characteristic of theman that the direction was as precise, and the writing as firm andclear, as though it had been written in his study.
My dear Watson [it said]:I write these few lines through the courtesy of Mr. Moriarty, whoawaits my convenience for the final discussion of those questionswhich lie between us.  He has been giving me a sketch of the methodsby which he avoided the English police and kept himself informed ofour movements.  They certainly confirm the very high opinion which Ihad formed of his abilities.  I am pleased to think that I shall beable to free society from any further effects of his presence, thoughI fear that it is at a cost which will give pain to my friends, andespecially, my dear Watson, to you.  I have already explained to you,however, that my career had in any case reached its crisis, and thatno possible conclusion to it could be more congenial to me than this. Indeed, if I may make a full confession to you, I was quiteconvinced that the letter from Meiringen was a hoax, and I allowedyou to depart on that errand under the persuasion that somedevelopment of this sort would follow.  Tell Inspector Patterson thatthe papers which he needs to convict the gang are in pigeonhole M.,done up in a blue envelope and inscribed "Moriarty."  I made everydisposition of my property before leaving England, and handed it tomy brother Mycroft.  Pray give my greetings to Mrs. Watson, andbelieve me to be, my dear fellow,Very sincerely yours,Sherlock Holmes
A few words may suffice to tell the little that remains.  Anexamination by experts leaves little doubt that a personal contestbetween the two men ended, as it could hardly fail to end in such asituation, in their reeling over, locked in each other's arms.  Anyattempt at recovering the bodies was absolutely hopeless, and there,deep down in that dreadful cauldron of swirling water and seethingfoam, will lie for all time the most dangerous criminal and theforemost champion of the law of their generation.  The Swiss youthwas never found again, and there can be no doubt that he was one ofthe numerous agents whom Moriarty kept in his employ.  As to thegang, it will be within the memory of the public how completely theevidence which Holmes had accumulated exposed their organization, andhow heavily the hand of the dead man weighed upon them.  Of theirterrible chief few details came out during the proceedings, and if Ihave now been compelled to make a clear statement of his career it isdue to those injudicious champions who have endeavored to clear hismemory by attacks upon him whom I shall ever regard as the best andthe wisest man whom I have ever known.





                     THE RETURN OF SHERLOCK HOLMES




                   THE ADVENTURE OF THE EMPTY HOUSE
It was in the spring of the year 1894 that all London was interested,and the fashionable world dismayed, by the murder of the HonourableRonald Adair under most unusual and inexplicable circumstances. Thepublic has already learned those particulars of the crime which cameout in the police investigation; but a good deal was suppressed uponthat occasion, since the case for the prosecution was sooverwhelmingly strong that it was not necessary to bring forward allthe facts. Only now, at the end of nearly ten years, am I allowed tosupply those missing links which make up the whole of that remarkablechain. The crime was of interest in itself, but that interest was asnothing to me compared to the inconceivable sequel, which afforded methe greatest shock and surprise of any event in my adventurous life.Even now, after this long interval, I find myself thrilling as Ithink of it, and feeling once more that sudden flood of joy,amazement, and incredulity which utterly submerged my mind. Let mesay to that public which has shown some interest in those glimpseswhich I have occasionally given them of the thoughts and actions of avery remarkable man that they are not to blame me if I have notshared my knowledge with them, for I should have considered it myfirst duty to have done so had I not been barred by a positiveprohibition from his own lips, which was only withdrawn upon thethird of last month.
It can be imagined that my close intimacy with Sherlock Holmes hadinterested me deeply in crime, and that after his disappearance Inever failed to read with care the various problems which came beforethe public, and I even attempted more than once for my own privatesatisfaction to employ his methods in their solution, though withindifferent success. There was none, however, which appealed to melike this tragedy of Ronald Adair. As I read the evidence at theinquest, which led up to a verdict of wilful murder against someperson or persons unknown, I realized more clearly than I had everdone the loss which the community had sustained by the death ofSherlock Holmes. There were points about this strange business whichwould, I was sure, have specially appealed to him, and the efforts ofthe police would have been supplemented, or more probablyanticipated, by the trained observation and the alert mind of thefirst criminal agent in Europe. All day as I drove upon my round Iturned over the case in my mind, and found no explanation whichappeared to me to be adequate. At the risk of telling a twice-toldtale I will recapitulate the facts as they were known to the publicat the conclusion of the inquest.
The Honourable Ronald Adair was the second son of the Earl ofMaynooth, at that time Governor of one of the Australian Colonies.Adair's mother had returned from Australia to undergo the operationfor cataract, and she, her son Ronald, and her daughter Hilda wereliving together at 427, Park Lane. The youth moved in the bestsociety, had, so far as was known, no enemies, and no particularvices. He had been engaged to Miss Edith Woodley, of Carstairs, butthe engagement had been broken off by mutual consent some monthsbefore, and there was no sign that it had left any very profoundfeeling behind it. For the rest the man's life moved in a narrow andconventional circle, for his habits were quiet and his natureunemotional. Yet it was upon this easy-going young aristocrat thatdeath came in most strange and unexpected form between the hours often and eleven-twenty on the night of March 30, 1894.
Ronald Adair was fond of cards, playing continually, but never forsuch stakes as would hurt him. He was a member of the Baldwin, theCavendish, and the Bagatelle card clubs. It was shown that afterdinner on the day of his death he had played a rubber of whist at thelatter club. He had also played there in the afternoon. The evidenceof those who had played with him--Mr. Murray, Sir John Hardy, andColonel Moran--showed that the game was whist, and that there was afairly equal fall of the cards. Adair might have lost five pounds,but not more. His fortune was a considerable one, and such a losscould not in any way affect him. He had played nearly every day atone club or other, but he was a cautious player, and usually rose awinner. It came out in evidence that in partnership with ColonelMoran he had actually won as much as four hundred and twenty poundsin a sitting some weeks before from Godfrey Milner and Lord Balmoral.So much for his recent history, as it came out at the inquest.
On the evening of the crime he returned from the club exactly at ten.His mother and sister were out spending the evening with a relation.The servant deposed that she heard him enter the front room on thesecond floor, generally used as his sitting-room. She had lit a firethere, and as it smoked she had opened the window. No sound was heardfrom the room until eleven-twenty, the hour of the return of LadyMaynooth and her daughter. Desiring to say good-night, she hadattempted to enter her son's room. The door was locked on the inside,and no answer could be got to their cries and knocking. Help wasobtained and the door forced. The unfortunate young man was foundlying near the table. His head had been horribly mutilated by anexpanding revolver bullet, but no weapon of any sort was to be foundin the room. On the table lay two bank-notes for ten pounds each andseventeen pounds ten in silver and gold, the money arranged in littlepiles of varying amount. There were some figures also upon a sheet ofpaper with the names of some club friends opposite to them, fromwhich it was conjectured that before his death he was endeavouring tomake out his losses or winnings at cards.
A minute examination of the circumstances served only to make thecase more complex. In the first place, no reason could be given whythe young man should have fastened the door upon the inside. Therewas the possibility that the murderer had done this and hadafterwards escaped by the window. The drop was at least twenty feet,however, and a bed of crocuses in full bloom lay beneath. Neither theflowers nor the earth showed any sign of having been disturbed, norwere there any marks upon the narrow strip of grass which separatedthe house from the road. Apparently, therefore, it was the young manhimself who had fastened the door. But how did he come by his death?No one could have climbed up to the window without leaving traces.Suppose a man had fired through the window, it would indeed be aremarkable shot who could with a revolver inflict so deadly a wound.Again, Park Lane is a frequented thoroughfare, and there is acab-stand within a hundred yards of the house. No one had heard ashot. And yet there was the dead man, and there the revolver bullet,which had mushroomed out, as soft-nosed bullets will, and soinflicted a wound which must have caused instantaneous death. Suchwere the circumstances of the Park Lane Mystery, which were furthercomplicated by entire absence of motive, since, as I have said, youngAdair was not known to have any enemy, and no attempt had been madeto remove the money or valuables in the room.
All day I turned these facts over in my mind, endeavouring to hitupon some theory which could reconcile them all, and to find thatline of least resistance which my poor friend had declared to be thestarting-point of every investigation. I confess that I made littleprogress. In the evening I strolled across the Park, and found myselfabout six o'clock at the Oxford Street end of Park Lane. A group ofloafers upon the pavements, all staring up at a particular window,directed me to the house which I had come to see. A tall, thin manwith coloured glasses, whom I strongly suspected of being aplain-clothes detective, was pointing out some theory of his own,while the others crowded round to listen to what he said. I got asnear him as I could, but his observations seemed to me to be absurd,so I withdrew again in some disgust. As I did so I struck against anelderly deformed man, who had been behind me, and I knocked downseveral books which he was carrying. I remember that as I picked themup I observed the title of one of them, The Origin of Tree Worship,and it struck me that the fellow must be some poor bibliophile who,either as a trade or as a hobby, was a collector of obscure volumes.I endeavoured to apologize for the accident, but it was evident thatthese books which I had so unfortunately maltreated were veryprecious objects in the eyes of their owner. With a snarl of contempthe turned upon his heel, and I saw his curved back and whiteside-whiskers disappear among the throng.
My observations of No. 427, Park Lane did little to clear up theproblem in which I was interested. The house was separated from thestreet by a low wall and railing, the whole not more than five feethigh. It was perfectly easy, therefore, for anyone to get into thegarden, but the window was entirely inaccessible, since there was nowater-pipe or anything which could help the most active man to climbit. More puzzled than ever I retraced my steps to Kensington. I hadnot been in my study five minutes when the maid entered to say that aperson desired to see me. To my astonishment it was none other thanmy strange old book-collector, his sharp, wizened face peering outfrom a frame of white hair, and his precious volumes, a dozen of themat least, wedged under his right arm.
"You're surprised to see me, sir," said he, in a strange, croakingvoice.
I acknowledged that I was.
"Well, I've a conscience, sir, and when I chanced to see you go intothis house, as I came hobbling after you, I thought to myself, I'lljust step in and see that kind gentleman, and tell him that if I wasa bit gruff in my manner there was not any harm meant, and that I ammuch obliged to him for picking up my books."
"You make too much of a trifle," said I. "May I ask how you knew whoI was?"
"Well, sir, if it isn't too great a liberty, I am a neighbour ofyours, for you'll find my little bookshop at the corner of ChurchStreet, and very happy to see you, I am sure. Maybe you collectyourself, sir; here's British Birds, and Catullus, and The HolyWar--a bargain every one of them. With five volumes you could justfill that gap on that second shelf. It looks untidy, does it not,sir?"
I moved my head to look at the cabinet behind me. When I turned againSherlock Holmes was standing smiling at me across my study table. Irose to my feet, stared at him for some seconds in utter amazement,and then it appears that I must have fainted for the first and thelast time in my life. Certainly a grey mist swirled before my eyes,and when it cleared I found my collar-ends undone and the tinglingafter-taste of brandy upon my lips. Holmes was bending over my chair,his flask in his hand.
"My dear Watson," said the well-remembered voice, "I owe you athousand apologies. I had no idea that you would be so affected."
I gripped him by the arm.
"Holmes!" I cried. "Is it really you? Can it indeed be that you arealive? Is it possible that you succeeded in climbing out of thatawful abyss?"
"Wait a moment," said he. "Are you sure that you are really fit todiscuss things? I have given you a serious shock by my unnecessarilydramatic reappearance."
"I am all right, but indeed, Holmes, I can hardly believe my eyes.Good heavens, to think that you--you of all men--should be standingin my study!" Again I gripped him by the sleeve and felt the thin,sinewy arm beneath it. "Well, you're not a spirit, anyhow," said I."My dear chap, I am overjoyed to see you. Sit down and tell me howyou came alive out of that dreadful chasm."
He sat opposite to me and lit a cigarette in his old nonchalantmanner. He was dressed in the seedy frock-coat of the book merchant,but the rest of that individual lay in a pile of white hair and oldbooks upon the table. Holmes looked even thinner and keener than ofold, but there was a dead-white tinge in his aquiline face which toldme that his life recently had not been a healthy one.
"I am glad to stretch myself, Watson," said he. "It is no joke when atall man has to take a foot off his stature for several hours on end.Now, my dear fellow, in the matter of these explanations we have, ifI may ask for your co-operation, a hard and dangerous night's work infront of us. Perhaps it would be better if I gave you an account ofthe whole situation when that work is finished."
"I am full of curiosity. I should much prefer to hear now."
"You'll come with me to-night?"
"When you like and where you like."
"This is indeed like the old days. We shall have time for a mouthfulof dinner before we need go. Well, then, about that chasm. I had noserious difficulty in getting out of it, for the very simple reasonthat I never was in it."
"You never were in it?"
"No, Watson, I never was in it. My note to you was absolutelygenuine. I had little doubt that I had come to the end of my careerwhen I perceived the somewhat sinister figure of the late ProfessorMoriarty standing upon the narrow pathway which led to safety. I readan inexorable purpose in his grey eyes. I exchanged some remarks withhim, therefore, and obtained his courteous permission to write theshort note which you afterwards received. I left it with mycigarette-box and my stick and I walked along the pathway, Moriartystill at my heels. When I reached the end I stood at bay. He drew noweapon, but he rushed at me and threw his long arms around me. Heknew that his own game was up, and was only anxious to revengehimself upon me. We tottered together upon the brink of the fall. Ihave some knowledge, however, of baritsu, or the Japanese system ofwrestling, which has more than once been very useful to me. I slippedthrough his grip, and he with a horrible scream kicked madly for afew seconds and clawed the air with both his hands. But for all hisefforts he could not get his balance, and over he went. With my faceover the brink I saw him fall for a long way. Then he struck a rock,bounded off, and splashed into the water."
I listened with amazement to this explanation, which Holmes deliveredbetween the puffs of his cigarette.
"But the tracks!" I cried. "I saw with my own eyes that two went downthe path and none returned."
"It came about in this way. The instant that the Professor haddisappeared it struck me what a really extraordinarily lucky chanceFate had placed in my way. I knew that Moriarty was not the only manwho had sworn my death. There were at least three others whose desirefor vengeance upon me would only be increased by the death of theirleader. They were all most dangerous men. One or other wouldcertainly get me. On the other hand, if all the world was convincedthat I was dead they would take liberties, these men, they would laythemselves open, and sooner or later I could destroy them. Then itwould be time for me to announce that I was still in the land of theliving. So rapidly does the brain act that I believe I had thoughtthis all out before Professor Moriarty had reached the bottom of theReichenbach Fall.
"I stood up and examined the rocky wall behind me. In yourpicturesque account of the matter, which I read with great interestsome months later, you assert that the wall was sheer. This was notliterally true. A few small footholds presented themselves, and therewas some indication of a ledge. The cliff is so high that to climb itall was an obvious impossibility, and it was equally impossible tomake my way along the wet path without leaving some tracks. I might,it is true, have reversed my boots, as I have done on similaroccasions, but the sight of three sets of tracks in one directionwould certainly have suggested a deception. On the whole, then, itwas best that I should risk the climb. It was not a pleasantbusiness, Watson. The fall roared beneath me. I am not a fancifulperson, but I give you my word that I seemed to hear Moriarty's voicescreaming at me out of the abyss. A mistake would have been fatal.More than once, as tufts of grass came out in my hand or my footslipped in the wet notches of the rock, I thought that I was gone.But I struggled upwards, and at last I reached a ledge several feetdeep and covered with soft green moss, where I could lie unseen inthe most perfect comfort. There I was stretched when you, my dearWatson, and all your following were investigating in the mostsympathetic and inefficient manner the circumstances of my death.
"At last, when you had all formed your inevitable and totallyerroneous conclusions, you departed for the hotel and I was leftalone. I had imagined that I had reached the end of my adventures,but a very unexpected occurrence showed me that there were surprisesstill in store for me. A huge rock, falling from above, boomed pastme, struck the path, and bounded over into the chasm. For an instantI thought that it was an accident; but a moment later, looking up, Isaw a man's head against the darkening sky, and another stone struckthe very ledge upon which I was stretched, within a foot of my head.Of course, the meaning of this was obvious. Moriarty had not beenalone. A confederate--and even that one glance had told me howdangerous a man that confederate was--had kept guard while theProfessor had attacked me. From a distance, unseen by me, he had beena witness of his friend's death and of my escape. He had waited, andthen, making his way round to the top of the cliff, he hadendeavoured to succeed where his comrade had failed.
"I did not take long to think about it, Watson. Again I saw that grimface look over the cliff, and I knew that it was the precursor ofanother stone. I scrambled down on to the path. I don't think I couldhave done it in cold blood. It was a hundred times more difficultthan getting up. But I had no time to think of the danger, foranother stone sang past me as I hung by my hands from the edge of theledge. Halfway down I slipped, but by the blessing of God I landed,torn and bleeding, upon the path. I took to my heels, did ten milesover the mountains in the darkness, and a week later I found myselfin Florence with the certainty that no one in the world knew what hadbecome of me.
"I had only one confidant--my brother Mycroft. I owe you manyapologies, my dear Watson, but it was all-important that it should bethought I was dead, and it is quite certain that you would not havewritten so convincing an account of my unhappy end had you notyourself thought that it was true. Several times during the lastthree years I have taken up my pen to write to you, but always Ifeared lest your affectionate regard for me should tempt you to someindiscretion which would betray my secret. For that reason I turnedaway from you this evening when you upset my books, for I was indanger at the time, and any show of surprise and emotion upon yourpart might have drawn attention to my identity and led to the mostdeplorable and irreparable results. As to Mycroft, I had to confidein him in order to obtain the money which I needed. The course ofevents in London did not run so well as I had hoped, for the trial ofthe Moriarty gang left two of its most dangerous members, my own mostvindictive enemies, at liberty. I travelled for two years in Tibet,therefore, and amused myself by visiting Lhassa and spending somedays with the head Llama. You may have read of the remarkableexplorations of a Norwegian named Sigerson, but I am sure that itnever occurred to you that you were receiving news of your friend. Ithen passed through Persia, looked in at Mecca, and paid a short butinteresting visit to the Khalifa at Khartoum, the results of which Ihave communicated to the Foreign Office. Returning to France I spentsome months in a research into the coal-tar derivatives, which Iconducted in a laboratory at Montpelier, in the South of France.Having concluded this to my satisfaction, and learning that only oneof my enemies was now left in London, I was about to return when mymovements were hastened by the news of this very remarkable Park LaneMystery, which not only appealed to me by its own merits, but whichseemed to offer some most peculiar personal opportunities. I cameover at once to London, called in my own person at Baker Street,threw Mrs. Hudson into violent hysterics, and found that Mycroft hadpreserved my rooms and my papers exactly as they had always been. Soit was, my dear Watson, that at two o'clock to-day I found myself inmy old arm-chair in my own old room, and only wishing that I couldhave seen my old friend Watson in the other chair which he has sooften adorned."
Such was the remarkable narrative to which I listened on that Aprilevening--a narrative which would have been utterly incredible to mehad it not been confirmed by the actual sight of the tall, sparefigure and the keen, eager face, which I had never thought to seeagain. In some manner he had learned of my own sad bereavement, andhis sympathy was shown in his manner rather than in his words. "Workis the best antidote to sorrow, my dear Watson," said he, "and I havea piece of work for us both to-night which, if we can bring it to asuccessful conclusion, will in itself justify a man's life on thisplanet." In vain I begged him to tell me more. "You will hear and seeenough before morning," he answered. "We have three years of the pastto discuss. Let that suffice until half-past nine, when we start uponthe notable adventure of the empty house."
It was indeed like old times when, at that hour, I found myselfseated beside him in a hansom, my revolver in my pocket and thethrill of adventure in my heart. Holmes was cold and stern andsilent. As the gleam of the street-lamps flashed upon his austerefeatures I saw that his brows were drawn down in thought and his thinlips compressed. I knew not what wild beast we were about to huntdown in the dark jungle of criminal London, but I was well assuredfrom the bearing of this master huntsman that the adventure was amost grave one, while the sardonic smile which occasionally brokethrough his ascetic gloom boded little good for the object of ourquest.
I had imagined that we were bound for Baker Street, but Holmesstopped the cab at the corner of Cavendish Square. I observed that ashe stepped out he gave a most searching glance to right and left, andat every subsequent street corner he took the utmost pains to assurethat he was not followed. Our route was certainly a singular one.Holmes's knowledge of the byways of London was extraordinary, and onthis occasion he passed rapidly, and with an assured step, through anetwork of mews and stables the very existence of which I had neverknown. We emerged at last into a small road, lined with old, gloomyhouses, which led us into Manchester Street, and so to BlandfordStreet. Here he turned swiftly down a narrow passage, passed througha wooden gate into a deserted yard, and then opened with a key theback door of a house. We entered together and he closed it behind us.
The place was pitch-dark, but it was evident to me that it was anempty house. Our feet creaked and crackled over the bare planking,and my outstretched hand touched a wall from which the paper washanging in ribbons. Holmes's cold, thin fingers closed round my wristand led me forwards down a long hall, until I dimly saw the murkyfanlight over the door. Here Holmes turned suddenly to the right, andwe found ourselves in a large, square, empty room, heavily shadowedin the corners, but faintly lit in the centre from the lights of thestreet beyond. There was no lamp near and the window was thick withdust, so that we could only just discern each other's figures within.My companion put his hand upon my shoulder and his lips close to myear.
"Do you know where we are?" he whispered.
"Surely that is Baker Street," I answered, staring through the dimwindow.
"Exactly. We are in Camden House, which stands opposite to our ownold quarters."
"But why are we here?"
"Because it commands so excellent a view of that picturesque pile.Might I trouble you, my dear Watson, to draw a little nearer to thewindow, taking every precaution not to show yourself, and then tolook up at our old rooms--the starting-point of so many of our littleadventures? We will see if my three years of absence have entirelytaken away my power to surprise you."
I crept forward and looked across at the familiar window. As my eyesfell upon it I gave a gasp and a cry of amazement. The blind was downand a strong light was burning in the room. The shadow of a man whowas seated in a chair within was thrown in hard, black outline uponthe luminous screen of the window. There was no mistaking the poiseof the head, the squareness of the shoulders, the sharpness of thefeatures. The face was turned half-round, and the effect was that ofone of those black silhouettes which our grandparents loved to frame.It was a perfect reproduction of Holmes. So amazed was I that I threwout my hand to make sure that the man himself was standing beside me.He was quivering with silent laughter.
"Well?" said he.
"Good heavens!" I cried. "It is marvellous."
"I trust that age doth not wither nor custom stale my infinitevariety,'" said he, and I recognised in his voice the joy and pridewhich the artist takes in his own creation. "It really is rather likeme, is it not?"
"I should be prepared to swear that it was you."
"The credit of the execution is due to Monsieur Oscar Meunier, ofGrenoble, who spent some days in doing the moulding. It is a bust inwax. The rest I arranged myself during my visit to Baker Street thisafternoon."
"But why?"
"Because, my dear Watson, I had the strongest possible reason forwishing certain people to think that I was there when I was reallyelsewhere."
"And you thought the rooms were watched?"
"I knew that they were watched."
"By whom?"
"By my old enemies, Watson. By the charming society whose leader liesin the Reichenbach Fall. You must remember that they knew, and onlythey knew, that I was still alive. Sooner or later they believed thatI should come back to my rooms. They watched them continuously, andthis morning they saw me arrive."
"How do you know?"
"Because I recognised their sentinel when I glanced out of my window.He is a harmless enough fellow, Parker by name, a garroter by trade,and a remarkable performer upon the Jew's harp. I cared nothing forhim. But I cared a great deal for the much more formidable person whowas behind him, the bosom friend of Moriarty, the man who dropped therocks over the cliff, the most cunning and dangerous criminal inLondon. That is the man who is after me to-night, Watson, and that isthe man who is quite unaware that we are after him."
My friend's plans were gradually revealing themselves. From thisconvenient retreat the watchers were being watched and the trackerstracked. That angular shadow up yonder was the bait and we were thehunters. In silence we stood together in the darkness and watched thehurrying figures who passed and repassed in front of us. Holmes wassilent and motionless; but I could tell that he was keenly alert, andthat his eyes were fixed intently upon the stream of passers-by. Itwas a bleak and boisterous night, and the wind whistled shrilly downthe long street. Many people were moving to and fro, most of themmuffled in their coats and cravats. Once or twice it seemed to methat I had seen the same figure before, and I especially noticed twomen who appeared to be sheltering themselves from the wind in thedoorway of a house some distance up the street. I tried to draw mycompanion's attention to them, but he gave a little ejaculation ofimpatience and continued to stare into the street. More than once hefidgeted with his feet and tapped rapidly with his fingers upon thewall. It was evident to me that he was becoming uneasy and that hisplans were not working out altogether as he had hoped. At last, asmidnight approached and the street gradually cleared, he paced up anddown the room in uncontrollable agitation. I was about to make someremark to him when I raised my eyes to the lighted window and againexperienced almost as great a surprise as before. I clutched Holmes'sarm and pointed upwards.
"The shadow has moved!" I cried.
It was, indeed, no longer the profile, but the back, which was turnedtowards us.
Three years had certainly not smoothed the asperities of his temperor his impatience with a less active intelligence than his own.
"Of course it has moved," said he. "Am I such a farcical bungler,Watson, that I should erect an obvious dummy and expect that some ofthe sharpest men in Europe would be deceived by it? We have been inthis room two hours, and Mrs. Hudson has made some change in thatfigure eight times, or once in every quarter of an hour. She works itfrom the front so that her shadow may never be seen. Ah!" He drew inhis breath with a shrill, excited intake. In the dim light I saw hishead thrown forward, his whole attitude rigid with attention.Outside, the street was absolutely deserted. Those two men mightstill be crouching in the doorway, but I could no longer see them.All was still and dark, save only that brilliant yellow screen infront of us with the black figure outlined upon its centre. Again inthe utter silence I heard that thin, sibilant note which spoke ofintense suppressed excitement. An instant later he pulled me backinto the blackest corner of the room, and I felt his warning handupon my lips. The fingers which clutched me were quivering. Never hadI known my friend more moved, and yet the dark street still stretchedlonely and motionless before us.
But suddenly I was aware of that which his keener senses had alreadydistinguished. A low, stealthy sound came to my ears, not from thedirection of Baker Street, but from the back of the very house inwhich we lay concealed. A door opened and shut. An instant latersteps crept down the passage--steps which were meant to be silent,but which reverberated harshly through the empty house. Holmescrouched back against the wall and I did the same, my hand closingupon the handle of my revolver. Peering through the gloom, I saw thevague outline of a man, a shade blacker than the blackness of theopen door. He stood for an instant, and then he crept forward,crouching, menacing, into the room. He was within three yards of us,this sinister figure, and I had braced myself to meet his spring,before I realized that he had no idea of our presence. He passedclose beside us, stole over to the window, and very softly andnoiselessly raised it for half a foot. As he sank to the level ofthis opening the light of the street, no longer dimmed by the dustyglass, fell full upon his face. The man seemed to be beside himselfwith excitement. His two eyes shone like stars and his features wereworking convulsively. He was an elderly man, with a thin, projectingnose, a high, bald forehead, and a huge grizzled moustache. Anopera-hat was pushed to the back of his head, and an evening dressshirt-front gleamed out through his open overcoat. His face was gauntand swarthy, scored with deep, savage lines. In his hand he carriedwhat appeared to be a stick, but as he laid it down upon the floor itgave a metallic clang. Then from the pocket of his overcoat he drew abulky object, and he busied himself in some task which ended with aloud, sharp click, as if a spring or bolt had fallen into its place.Still kneeling upon the floor he bent forward and threw all hisweight and strength upon some lever, with the result that there camea long, whirling, grinding noise, ending once more in a powerfulclick. He straightened himself then, and I saw that what he held inhis hand was a sort of gun, with a curiously misshapen butt. Heopened it at the breech, put something in, and snapped thebreech-block. Then, crouching down, he rested the end of the barrelupon the ledge of the open window, and I saw his long moustache droopover the stock and his eye gleam as it peered along the sights. Iheard a little sigh of satisfaction as he cuddled the butt into hisshoulder, and saw that amazing target, the black man on the yellowground, standing clear at the end of his fore sight. For an instanthe was rigid and motionless. Then his finger tightened on thetrigger. There was a strange, loud whiz and a long, silvery tinkle ofbroken glass. At that instant Holmes sprang like a tiger on to themarksman's back and hurled him flat upon his face. He was up again ina moment, and with convulsive strength he seized Holmes by thethroat; but I struck him on the head with the butt of my revolver andhe dropped again upon the floor. I fell upon him, and as I held himmy comrade blew a shrill call upon a whistle. There was the clatterof running feet upon the pavement, and two policemen in uniform, withone plain-clothes detective, rushed through the front entrance andinto the room.
"That you, Lestrade?" said Holmes.
"Yes, Mr. Holmes. I took the job myself. It's good to see you back inLondon, sir."
"I think you want a little unofficial help. Three undetected murdersin one year won't do, Lestrade. But you handled the Molesey Mysterywith less than your usual--that's to say, you handled it fairlywell."
We had all risen to our feet, our prisoner breathing hard, with astalwart constable on each side of him. Already a few loiterers hadbegun to collect in the street. Holmes stepped up to the window,closed it, and dropped the blinds. Lestrade had produced two candlesand the policemen had uncovered their lanterns. I was able at last tohave a good look at our prisoner.
It was a tremendously virile and yet sinister face which was turnedtowards us. With the brow of a philosopher above and the jaw of asensualist below, the man must have started with great capacities forgood or for evil. But one could not look upon his cruel blue eyes,with their drooping, cynical lids, or upon the fierce, aggressivenose and the threatening, deep-lined brow, without reading Nature'splainest danger-signals. He took no heed of any of us, but his eyeswere fixed upon Holmes's face with an expression in which hatred andamazement were equally blended. "You fiend!" he kept on muttering."You clever, clever fiend!"
"Ah, Colonel!" said Holmes, arranging his rumpled collar; "'journeysend in lovers' meetings,' as the old play says. I don't think I havehad the pleasure of seeing you since you favoured me with thoseattentions as I lay on the ledge above the Reichenbach Fall."
The Colonel still stared at my friend like a man in a trance. "Youcunning, cunning fiend!" was all that he could say.
"I have not introduced you yet," said Holmes. "This, gentlemen, isColonel Sebastian Moran, once of Her Majesty's Indian Army, and thebest heavy game shot that our Eastern Empire has ever produced. Ibelieve I am correct, Colonel, in saying that your bag of tigersstill remains unrivalled?"
The fierce old man said nothing, but still glared at my companion;with his savage eyes and bristling moustache he was wonderfully likea tiger himself.
"I wonder that my very simple stratagem could deceive so old ashikari," said Holmes. "It must be very familiar to you. Have you nottethered a young kid under a tree, lain above it with your rifle, andwaited for the bait to bring up your tiger? This empty house is mytree and you are my tiger. You have possibly had other guns inreserve in case there should be several tigers, or in the unlikelysupposition of your own aim failing you. These," he pointed around,"are my other guns. The parallel is exact."
Colonel Moran sprang forward, with a snarl of rage, but theconstables dragged him back. The fury upon his face was terrible tolook at.
"I confess that you had one small surprise for me," said Holmes. "Idid not anticipate that you would yourself make use of this emptyhouse and this convenient front window. I had imagined you asoperating from the street, where my friend Lestrade and his merry menwere awaiting you. With that exception all has gone as I expected."
Colonel Moran turned to the official detective.
"You may or may not have just cause for arresting me," said he, "butat least there can be no reason why I should submit to the gibes ofthis person. If I am in the hands of the law let things be done in alegal way."
"Well, that's reasonable enough," said Lestrade. "Nothing further youhave to say, Mr. Holmes, before we go?"
Holmes had picked up the powerful air-gun from the floor and wasexamining its mechanism.
"An admirable and unique weapon," said he, "noiseless and oftremendous power. I knew Von Herder, the blind German mechanic, whoconstructed it to the order of the late Professor Moriarty. For yearsI have been aware of its existence, though I have never before hadthe opportunity of handling it. I commend it very specially to yourattention, Lestrade, and also the bullets which fit it."
"You can trust us to look after that, Mr. Holmes," said Lestrade, asthe whole party moved towards the door. "Anything further to say?"
"Only to ask what charge you intend to prefer?"
"What charge, sir? Why, of course, the attempted murder of Mr.Sherlock Holmes."
"Not so, Lestrade. I do not propose to appear in the matter at all.To you, and to you only, belongs the credit of the remarkable arrestwhich you have effected. Yes, Lestrade, I congratulate you! With yourusual happy mixture of cunning and audacity you have got him."
"Got him! Got whom, Mr. Holmes?"
"The man that the whole force has been seeking in vain--ColonelSebastian Moran, who shot the Honourable Ronald Adair with anexpanding bullet from an air-gun through the open window of thesecond-floor front of No. 427, Park Lane, upon the 30th of lastmonth. That's the charge, Lestrade. And now, Watson, if you canendure the draught from a broken window, I think that half an hour inmy study over a cigar may afford you some profitable amusement."
Our old chambers had been left unchanged through the supervision ofMycroft Holmes and the immediate care of Mrs. Hudson. As I entered Isaw, it is true, an unwonted tidiness, but the old landmarks were allin their place. There were the chemical corner and the acid-stained,deal-topped table. There upon a shelf was the row of formidablescrap-books and books of reference which many of our fellow-citizenswould have been so glad to burn. The diagrams, the violin-case, andthe pipe-rack--even the Persian slipper which contained thetobacco--all met my eyes as I glanced round me. There were twooccupants of the room--one Mrs. Hudson, who beamed upon us both as weentered; the other the strange dummy which had played so important apart in the evening's adventures. It was a wax-coloured model of myfriend, so admirably done that it was a perfect facsimile. It stoodon a small pedestal table with an old dressing-gown of Holmes's sodraped round it that the illusion from the street was absolutelyperfect.
"I hope you preserved all precautions, Mrs. Hudson?" said Holmes.
"I went to it on my knees, sir, just as you told me."
"Excellent. You carried the thing out very well. Did you observewhere the bullet went?"
"Yes, sir. I'm afraid it has spoilt your beautiful bust, for itpassed right through the head and flattened itself on the wall. Ipicked it up from the carpet. Here it is!"
Holmes held it out to me. "A soft revolver bullet, as you perceive,Watson. There's genius in that, for who would expect to find such athing fired from an air-gun. All right, Mrs. Hudson, I am muchobliged for your assistance. And now, Watson, let me see you in yourold seat once more, for there are several points which I should liketo discuss with you."
He had thrown off the seedy frock-coat, and now he was the Holmes ofold in the mouse-coloured dressing-gown which he took from hiseffigy.
"The old shikari's nerves have not lost their steadiness nor his eyestheir keenness," said he, with a laugh, as he inspected the shatteredforehead of his bust.
"Plumb in the middle of the back of the head and smack through thebrain. He was the best shot in India, and I expect that there are fewbetter in London. Have you heard the name?"
"No, I have not."
"Well, well, such is fame! But, then, if I remember aright, you hadnot heard the name of Professor James Moriarty, who had one of thegreat brains of the century. Just give me down my index ofbiographies from the shelf."
He turned over the pages lazily, leaning back in his chair andblowing great clouds from his cigar.
"My collection of M's is a fine one," said he. "Moriarty himself isenough to make any letter illustrious, and here is Morgan thepoisoner, and Merridew of abominable memory, and Mathews, who knockedout my left canine in the waiting-room at Charing Cross, and,finally, here is our friend of to-night."
He handed over the book, and I read:
Moran, Sebastian, Colonel. Unemployed. Formerly 1st BengalorePioneers. Born London, 1840. Son of Sir Augustus Moran, C.B., onceBritish Minister to Persia. Educated Eton and Oxford. Served inJowaki Campaign, Afghan Campaign, Charasiab (despatches), Sherpur,and Cabul. Author of Heavy Game of the Western Himalayas, 1881; ThreeMonths in the Jungle, 1884. Address: Conduit Street. Clubs: TheAnglo-Indian, the Tankerville, the Bagatelle Card Club.
On the margin was written, in Holmes's precise hand:
The second most dangerous man in London.
"This is astonishing," said I, as I handed back the volume. "Theman's career is that of an honourable soldier."
"It is true," Holmes answered. "Up to a certain point he did well. Hewas always a man of iron nerve, and the story is still told in Indiahow he crawled down a drain after a wounded man-eating tiger. Thereare some trees, Watson, which grow to a certain height and thensuddenly develop some unsightly eccentricity. You will see it oftenin humans. I have a theory that the individual represents in hisdevelopment the whole procession of his ancestors, and that such asudden turn to good or evil stands for some strong influence whichcame into the line of his pedigree. The person becomes, as it were,the epitome of the history of his own family."
"It is surely rather fanciful."
"Well, I don't insist upon it. Whatever the cause, Colonel Moranbegan to go wrong. Without any open scandal he still made India toohot to hold him. He retired, came to London, and again acquired anevil name. It was at this time that he was sought out by ProfessorMoriarty, to whom for a time he was chief of the staff. Moriartysupplied him liberally with money and used him only in one or twovery high-class jobs which no ordinary criminal could haveundertaken. You may have some recollection of the death of Mrs.Stewart, of Lauder, in 1887. Not? Well, I am sure Moran was at thebottom of it; but nothing could be proved. So cleverly was theColonel concealed that even when the Moriarty gang was broken up wecould not incriminate him. You remember at that date, when I calledupon you in your rooms, how I put up the shutters for fear ofair-guns? No doubt you thought me fanciful. I knew exactly what I wasdoing, for I knew of the existence of this remarkable gun, and I knewalso that one of the best shots in the world would be behind it. Whenwe were in Switzerland he followed us with Moriarty, and it wasundoubtedly he who gave me that evil five minutes on the Reichenbachledge.
"You may think that I read the papers with some attention during mysojourn in France, on the look-out for any chance of laying him bythe heels. So long as he was free in London my life would really nothave been worth living. Night and day the shadow would have been overme, and sooner or later his chance must have come. What could I do? Icould not shoot him at sight, or I should myself be in the dock.There was no use appealing to a magistrate. They cannot interfere onthe strength of what would appear to them to be a wild suspicion. SoI could do nothing. But I watched the criminal news, knowing thatsooner or later I should get him. Then came the death of this RonaldAdair. My chance had come at last! Knowing what I did, was it notcertain that Colonel Moran had done it? He had played cards with thelad; he had followed him home from the club; he had shot him throughthe open window. There was not a doubt of it. The bullets alone areenough to put his head in a noose. I came over at once. I was seen bythe sentinel, who would, I knew, direct the Colonel's attention to mypresence. He could not fail to connect my sudden return with hiscrime and to be terribly alarmed. I was sure that he would make anattempt to get me out of the way at once, and would bring round hismurderous weapon for that purpose. I left him an excellent mark inthe window, and, having warned the police that they might beneeded--by the way, Watson, you spotted their presence in thatdoorway with unerring accuracy--I took up what seemed to me to be ajudicious post for observation, never dreaming that he would choosethe same spot for his attack. Now, my dear Watson, does anythingremain for me to explain?"
"Yes," said I. "You have not made it clear what was Colonel Moran'smotive in murdering the Honourable Ronald Adair."
"Ah! my dear Watson, there we come into those realms of conjecturewhere the most logical mind may be at fault. Each may form his ownhypothesis upon the present evidence, and yours is as likely to becorrect as mine."
"You have formed one, then?"
"I think that it is not difficult to explain the facts. It came outin evidence that Colonel Moran and young Adair had between them won aconsiderable amount of money. Now, Moran undoubtedly played foul--ofthat I have long been aware. I believe that on the day of the murderAdair had discovered that Moran was cheating. Very likely he hadspoken to him privately, and had threatened to expose him unless hevoluntarily resigned his membership of the club and promised not toplay cards again. It is unlikely that a youngster like Adair would atonce make a hideous scandal by exposing a well-known man so mucholder than himself. Probably he acted as I suggest. The exclusionfrom his clubs would mean ruin to Moran, who lived by his ill-gottencard gains. He therefore murdered Adair, who at the time wasendeavouring to work out how much money he should himself return,since he could not profit by his partner's foul play. He locked thedoor lest the ladies should surprise him and insist upon knowing whathe was doing with these names and coins. Will it pass?"
"I have no doubt that you have hit upon the truth."
"It will be verified or disproved at the trial. Meanwhile, come whatmay, Colonel Moran will trouble us no more, the famous air-gun of VonHerder will embellish the Scotland Yard Museum, and once again Mr.Sherlock Holmes is free to devote his life to examining thoseinteresting little problems which the complex life of London soplentifully presents."





                 THE ADVENTURE OF THE NORWOOD BUILDER
"From the point of view of the criminal expert," said Mr. SherlockHolmes, "London has become a singularly uninteresting city since thedeath of the late lamented Professor Moriarty."
"I can hardly think that you would find many decent citizens to agreewith you," I answered.
"Well, well, I must not be selfish," said he, with a smile, as hepushed back his chair from the breakfast-table. "The community iscertainly the gainer, and no one the loser, save the poor out-of-workspecialist, whose occupation has gone. With that man in the fieldone's morning paper presented infinite possibilities. Often it wasonly the smallest trace, Watson, the faintest indication, and yet itwas enough to tell me that the great malignant brain was there, asthe gentlest tremors of the edges of the web remind one of the foulspider which lurks in the centre. Petty thefts, wanton assaults,purposeless outrage--to the man who held the clue all could be workedinto one connected whole. To the scientific student of the highercriminal world no capital in Europe offered the advantages whichLondon then possessed. But now--" He shrugged his shoulders inhumorous deprecation of the state of things which he had himself doneso much to produce.
At the time of which I speak Holmes had been back for some months,and I, at his request, had sold my practice and returned to share theold quarters in Baker Street. A young doctor, named Verner, hadpurchased my small Kensington practice, and given with astonishinglylittle demur the highest price that I ventured to ask--an incidentwhich only explained itself some years later when I found that Vernerwas a distant relation of Holmes's, and that it was my friend who hadreally found the money.
Our months of partnership had not been so uneventful as he hadstated, for I find, on looking over my notes, that this periodincludes the case of the papers of Ex-President Murillo, and also theshocking affair of the Dutch steamship Friesland, which so nearlycost us both our lives. His cold and proud nature was always averse,however, to anything in the shape of public applause, and he bound mein the most stringent terms to say no further word of himself, hismethods, or his successes--a prohibition which, as I have explained,has only now been removed.
Mr. Sherlock Holmes was leaning back in his chair after his whimsicalprotest, and was unfolding his morning paper in a leisurely fashion,when our attention was arrested by a tremendous ring at the bell,followed immediately by a hollow drumming sound, as if someone werebeating on the outer door with his fist. As it opened there came atumultuous rush into the hall, rapid feet clattered up the stair, andan instant later a wild-eyed and frantic young man, pale,dishevelled, and palpitating, burst into the room. He looked from oneto the other of us, and under our gaze of inquiry he became consciousthat some apology was needed for this unceremonious entry.
"I'm sorry, Mr. Holmes," he cried. "You mustn't blame me. I am nearlymad. Mr. Holmes, I am the unhappy John Hector McFarlane."
He made the announcement as if the name alone would explain both hisvisit and its manner; but I could see by my companion's unresponsiveface that it meant no more to him than to me.
"Have a cigarette, Mr. McFarlane," said he, pushing his case across."I am sure that with your symptoms my friend Dr. Watson here wouldprescribe a sedative. The weather has been so very warm these lastfew days. Now, if you feel a little more composed, I should be gladif you would sit down in that chair and tell us very slowly andquietly who you are and what it is that you want. You mentioned yourname as if I should recognise it, but I assure you that, beyond theobvious facts that you are a bachelor, a solicitor, a Freemason, andan asthmatic, I know nothing whatever about you."
Familiar as I was with my friend's methods, it was not difficult forme to follow his deductions, and to observe the untidiness of attire,the sheaf of legal papers, the watch-charm, and the breathing whichhad prompted them. Our client, however, stared in amazement.
"Yes, I am all that, Mr. Holmes, and in addition I am the mostunfortunate man at this moment in London. For Heaven's sake don'tabandon me, Mr. Holmes! If they come to arrest me before I havefinished my story, make them give me time so that I may tell you thewhole truth. I could go to jail happy if I knew that you were workingfor me outside."
"Arrest you!" said Holmes. "This is really most grati--mostinteresting. On what charge do you expect to be arrested?"
"Upon the charge of murdering Mr. Jonas Oldacre, of Lower Norwood."
My companion's expressive face showed a sympathy which was not, I amafraid, entirely unmixed with satisfaction.
"Dear me," said he; "it was only this moment at breakfast that I wassaying to my friend, Dr. Watson, that sensational cases haddisappeared out of our papers."
Our visitor stretched forward a quivering hand and picked up theDaily Telegraph, which still lay upon Holmes's knee.
"If you had looked at it, sir, you would have seen at a glance whatthe errand is on which I have come to you this morning. I feel as ifmy name and my misfortune must be in every man's mouth." He turned itover to expose the central page. "Here it is, and with yourpermission I will read it to you. Listen to this, Mr. Holmes. Thehead-lines are: 'Mysterious Affair at Lower Norwood. Disappearance ofa Well-known Builder. Suspicion of Murder and Arson. A Clue to theCriminal.' That is the clue which they are already following, Mr.Holmes, and I know that it leads infallibly to me. I have beenfollowed from London Bridge Station, and I am sure that they are onlywaiting for the warrant to arrest me. It will break my mother'sheart--it will break her heart!" He wrung his hands in an agony ofapprehension, and swayed backwards and forwards in his chair.
I looked with interest upon this man, who was accused of being theperpetrator of a crime of violence. He was flaxen-haired and handsomein a washed-out negative fashion, with frightened blue eyes and aclean-shaven face, with a weak, sensitive mouth. His age may havebeen about twenty-seven; his dress and bearing that of a gentleman.From the pocket of his light summer overcoat protruded the bundle ofendorsed papers which proclaimed his profession.
"We must use what time we have," said Holmes. "Watson, would you havethe kindness to take the paper and to read me the paragraph inquestion?"
Underneath the vigorous head-lines which our client had quoted I readthe following suggestive narrative:--
"Late last night, or early this morning, an incident occurred atLower Norwood which points, it is feared, to a serious crime. Mr.Jonas Oldacre is a well-known resident of that suburb, where he hascarried on his business as a builder for many years. Mr. Oldacre is abachelor, fifty-two years of age, and lives in Deep Dene House, atthe Sydenham end of the road of that name. He has had the reputationof being a man of eccentric habits, secretive and retiring. For someyears he has practically withdrawn from the business, in which he issaid to have amassed considerable wealth. A small timber-yard stillexists, however, at the back of the house, and last night, abouttwelve o'clock, an alarm was given that one of the stacks was onfire. The engines were soon upon the spot, but the dry wood burnedwith great fury, and it was impossible to arrest the conflagrationuntil the stack had been entirely consumed. Up to this point theincident bore the appearance of an ordinary accident, but freshindications seem to point to serious crime. Surprise was expressed atthe absence of the master of the establishment from the scene of thefire, and an inquiry followed, which showed that he had disappearedfrom the house. An examination of his room revealed that the bed hadnot been slept in, that a safe which stood in it was open, that anumber of important papers were scattered about the room, and,finally, that there were signs of a murderous struggle, slight tracesof blood being found within the room, and an oaken walking-stick,which also showed stains of blood upon the handle. It is known thatMr. Jonas Oldacre had received a late visitor in his bedroom uponthat night, and the stick found has been identified as the propertyof this person, who is a young London solicitor named John HectorMcFarlane, junior partner of Graham and McFarlane, of 426, GreshamBuildings, E.C. The police believe that they have evidence in theirpossession which supplies a very convincing motive for the crime, andaltogether it cannot be doubted that sensational developments willfollow."Later.--It is rumoured as we go to press that Mr. John HectorMcFarlane has actually been arrested on the charge of the murder ofMr. Jonas Oldacre. It is at least certain that a warrant has beenissued. There have been further and sinister developments in theinvestigation at Norwood. Besides the signs of a struggle in the roomof the unfortunate builder it is now known that the French windows ofhis bedroom (which is on the ground floor) were found to be open,that there were marks as if some bulky object had been dragged acrossto the wood-pile, and, finally, it is asserted that charred remainshave been found among the charcoal ashes of the fire. The policetheory is that a most sensational crime has been committed, that thevictim was clubbed to death in his own bedroom, his papers rifled,and his dead body dragged across to the wood-stack, which was thenignited so as to hide all traces of the crime. The conduct of thecriminal investigation has been left in the experienced hands ofInspector Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, who is following up the clueswith his accustomed energy and sagacity."
Sherlock Holmes listened with closed eyes and finger-tips together tothis remarkable account.
"The case has certainly some points of interest," said he, in hislanguid fashion. "May I ask, in the first place, Mr. McFarlane, howit is that you are still at liberty, since there appears to be enoughevidence to justify your arrest?"
"I live at Torrington Lodge, Blackheath, with my parents, Mr. Holmes;but last night, having to do business very late with Mr. JonasOldacre, I stayed at an hotel in Norwood, and came to my businessfrom there. I knew nothing of this affair until I was in the train,when I read what you have just heard. I at once saw the horribledanger of my position, and I hurried to put the case into your hands.I have no doubt that I should have been arrested either at my Cityoffice or at my home. A man followed me from London Bridge Station,and I have no doubt--Great Heaven, what is that?"
It was a clang of the bell, followed instantly by heavy steps uponthe stair. A moment later our old friend Lestrade appeared in thedoorway. Over his shoulder I caught a glimpse of one or two uniformedpolicemen outside.
"Mr. John Hector McFarlane?" said Lestrade.
Our unfortunate client rose with a ghastly face.
"I arrest you for the wilful murder of Mr. Jonas Oldacre, of LowerNorwood."
McFarlane turned to us with a gesture of despair, and sank into hischair once more like one who is crushed.
"One moment, Lestrade," said Holmes. "Half an hour more or less canmake no difference to you, and the gentleman was about to give us anaccount of this very interesting affair, which might aid us inclearing it up."
"I think there will be no difficulty in clearing it up," saidLestrade, grimly.
"None the less, with your permission, I should be much interested tohear his account."
"Well, Mr. Holmes, it is difficult for me to refuse you anything, foryou have been of use to the force once or twice in the past, and weowe you a good turn at Scotland Yard," said Lestrade. "At the sametime I must remain with my prisoner, and I am bound to warn him thatanything he may say will appear in evidence against him."
"I wish nothing better," said our client. "All I ask is that youshould hear and recognise the absolute truth."
Lestrade looked at his watch. "I'll give you half an hour," said he.
"I must explain first," said McFarlane, "that I knew nothing of Mr.Jonas Oldacre. His name was familiar to me, for many years ago myparents were acquainted with him, but they drifted apart. I was verymuch surprised, therefore, when yesterday, about three o'clock in theafternoon, he walked into my office in the City. But I was still moreastonished when he told me the object of his visit. He had in hishand several sheets of a note-book, covered with scribbledwriting--here they are--and he laid them on my table.
"'Here is my will,' said he. 'I want you, Mr. McFarlane, to cast itinto proper legal shape. I will sit here while you do so.'
"I set myself to copy it, and you can imagine my astonishment when Ifound that, with some reservations, he had left all his property tome. He was a strange little, ferret-like man, with white eyelashes,and when I looked up at him I found his keen grey eyes fixed upon mewith an amused expression. I could hardly believe my own senses as Iread the terms of the will; but he explained that he was a bachelorwith hardly any living relation, that he had known my parents in hisyouth, and that he had always heard of me as a very deserving youngman, and was assured that his money would be in worthy hands. Ofcourse, I could only stammer out my thanks. The will was dulyfinished, signed, and witnessed by my clerk. This is it on the bluepaper, and these slips, as I have explained, are the rough draft. Mr.Jonas Oldacre then informed me that there were a number ofdocuments--building leases, title-deeds, mortgages, scrip, and soforth--which it was necessary that I should see and understand. Hesaid that his mind would not be easy until the whole thing wassettled, and he begged me to come out to his house at Norwood thatnight, bringing the will with me, and to arrange matters. 'Remember,my boy, not one word to your parents about the affair untileverything is settled. We will keep it as a little surprise forthem.' He was very insistent upon this point, and made me promise itfaithfully.
"You can imagine, Mr. Holmes, that I was not in a humour to refusehim anything that he might ask. He was my benefactor, and all mydesire was to carry out his wishes in every particular. I sent atelegram home, therefore, to say that I had important business onhand, and that it was impossible for me to say how late I might be.Mr. Oldacre had told me that he would like me to have supper with himat nine, as he might not be home before that hour. I had somedifficulty in finding his house, however, and it was nearly half-pastbefore I reached it. I found him--"
"One moment!" said Holmes. "Who opened the door?"
"A middle-aged woman, who was, I suppose, his housekeeper."
"And it was she, I presume, who mentioned your name?"
"Exactly," said McFarlane.
"Pray proceed."
McFarlane wiped his damp brow and then continued his narrative:--
"I was shown by this woman into a sitting-room, where a frugal supperwas laid out. Afterwards Mr. Jonas Oldacre led me into his bedroom,in which there stood a heavy safe. This he opened and took out a massof documents, which we went over together. It was between eleven andtwelve when we finished. He remarked that we must not disturb thehousekeeper. He showed me out through his own French window, whichhad been open all this time."
"Was the blind down?" asked Holmes.
"I will not be sure, but I believe that it was only half down. Yes, Iremember how he pulled it up in order to swing open the window. Icould not find my stick, and he said, 'Never mind, my boy; I shallsee a good deal of you now, I hope, and I will keep your stick untilyou come back to claim it.' I left him there, the safe open, and thepapers made up in packets upon the table. It was so late that I couldnot get back to Blackheath, so I spent the night at the Anerley Arms,and I knew nothing more until I read of this horrible affair in themorning."
"Anything more that you would like to ask, Mr. Holmes?" saidLestrade, whose eyebrows had gone up once or twice during thisremarkable explanation.
"Not until I have been to Blackheath."
"You mean to Norwood," said Lestrade.
"Oh, yes; no doubt that is what I must have meant," said Holmes, withhis enigmatical smile. Lestrade had learned by more experiences thanhe would care to acknowledge that that razor-like brain could cutthrough that which was impenetrable to him. I saw him look curiouslyat my companion.
"I think I should like to have a word with you presently, Mr.Sherlock Holmes," said he. "Now, Mr. McFarlane, two of my constablesare at the door and there is a four-wheeler waiting." The wretchedyoung man arose, and with a last beseeching glance at us walked fromthe room. The officers conducted him to the cab, but Lestraderemained.
Holmes had picked up the pages which formed the rough draft of thewill, and was looking at them with the keenest interest upon hisface.
"There are some points about that document, Lestrade, are there not?"said he, pushing them over.
The official looked at them with a puzzled expression.
"I can read the first few lines, and these in the middle of thesecond page, and one or two at the end. Those are as clear as print,"said he; "but the writing in between is very bad, and there are threeplaces where I cannot read it at all."
"What do you make of that?" said Holmes.
"Well, what do you make of it?"
"That it was written in a train; the good writing representsstations, the bad writing movement, and the very bad writing passingover points. A scientific expert would pronounce at once that thiswas drawn up on a suburban line, since nowhere save in the immediatevicinity of a great city could there be so quick a succession ofpoints. Granting that his whole journey was occupied in drawing upthe will, then the train was an express, only stopping once betweenNorwood and London Bridge."
Lestrade began to laugh.
"You are too many for me when you begin to get on your theories, Mr.Holmes," said he. "How does this bear on the case?"
"Well, it corroborates the young man's story to the extent that thewill was drawn up by Jonas Oldacre in his journey yesterday. It iscurious--is it not?--that a man should draw up so important adocument in so haphazard a fashion. It suggests that he did not thinkit was going to be of much practical importance. If a man drew up awill which he did not intend ever to be effective he might do it so."
"Well, he drew up his own death-warrant at the same time," saidLestrade.
"Oh, you think so?"
"Don't you?"
"Well, it is quite possible; but the case is not clear to me yet."
"Not clear? Well, if that isn't clear, what could be clear? Here is ayoung man who learns suddenly that if a certain older man dies hewill succeed to a fortune. What does he do? He says nothing toanyone, but he arranges that he shall go out on some pretext to seehis client that night; he waits until the only other person in thehouse is in bed, and then in the solitude of a man's room he murdershim, burns his body in the wood-pile, and departs to a neighbouringhotel. The blood-stains in the room and also on the stick are veryslight. It is probable that he imagined his crime to be a bloodlessone, and hoped that if the body were consumed it would hide alltraces of the method of his death--traces which for some reason musthave pointed to him. Is all this not obvious?"
"It strikes me, my good Lestrade, as being just a trifle tooobvious," said Holmes. "You do not add imagination to your othergreat qualities; but if you could for one moment put yourself in theplace of this young man, would you choose the very night after thewill had been made to commit your crime? Would it not seem dangerousto you to make so very close a relation between the two incidents?Again, would you choose an occasion when you are known to be in thehouse, when a servant has let you in? And, finally, would you takethe great pains to conceal the body and yet leave your own stick as asign that you were the criminal? Confess, Lestrade, that all this isvery unlikely."
"As to the stick, Mr. Holmes, you know as well as I do that acriminal is often flurried and does things which a cool man wouldavoid. He was very likely afraid to go back to the room. Give meanother theory that would fit the facts."
"I could very easily give you half-a-dozen," said Holmes. "Here, forexample, is a very possible and even probable one. I make you a freepresent of it. The older man is showing documents which are ofevident value. A passing tramp sees them through the window, theblind of which is only half down. Exit the solicitor. Enter thetramp! He seizes a stick, which he observes there, kills Oldacre, anddeparts after burning the body."
"Why should the tramp burn the body?"
"For the matter of that why should McFarlane?"
"To hide some evidence."
"Possibly the tramp wanted to hide that any murder at all had beencommitted."
"And why did the tramp take nothing?"
"Because they were papers that he could not negotiate."
Lestrade shook his head, though it seemed to me that his manner wasless absolutely assured than before.
"Well, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, you may look for your tramp, and whileyou are finding him we will hold on to our man. The future will showwhich is right. Just notice this point, Mr. Holmes: that so far as weknow none of the papers were removed, and that the prisoner is theone man in the world who had no reason for removing them, since hewas heir-at-law and would come into them in any case."
My friend seemed struck by this remark.
"I don't mean to deny that the evidence is in some ways very stronglyin favour of your theory," said he. "I only wish to point out thatthere are other theories possible. As you say, the future willdecide. Good morning! I dare say that in the course of the day Ishall drop in at Norwood and see how you are getting on."
When the detective departed my friend rose and made his preparationsfor the day's work with the alert air of a man who has a congenialtask before him.
"My first movement, Watson," said he, as he bustled into hisfrock-coat, "must, as I said, be in the direction of Blackheath."
"And why not Norwood?"
"Because we have in this case one singular incident coming close tothe heels of another singular incident. The police are making themistake of concentrating their attention upon the second, because ithappens to be the one which is actually criminal. But it is evidentto me that the logical way to approach the case is to begin by tryingto throw some light upon the first incident--the curious will, sosuddenly made, and to so unexpected an heir. It may do something tosimplify what followed. No, my dear fellow, I don't think you canhelp me. There is no prospect of danger, or I should not dream ofstirring out without you. I trust that when I see you in the eveningI will be able to report that I have been able to do something forthis unfortunate youngster who has thrown himself upon myprotection."
It was late when my friend returned, and I could see by a glance athis haggard and anxious face that the high hopes with which he hadstarted had not been fulfilled. For an hour he droned away upon hisviolin, endeavouring to soothe his own ruffled spirits. At last heflung down the instrument and plunged into a detailed account of hismisadventures.
"It's all going wrong, Watson--all as wrong as it can go. I kept abold face before Lestrade, but, upon my soul, I believe that for oncethe fellow is on the right track and we are on the wrong. All myinstincts are one way and all the facts are the other, and I muchfear that British juries have not yet attained that pitch ofintelligence when they will give the preference to my theories overLestrade's facts."
"Did you go to Blackheath?"
"Yes, Watson, I went there, and I found very quickly that the latelamented Oldacre was a pretty considerable black-guard. The fatherwas away in search of his son. The mother was at home--a little,fluffy, blue-eyed person, in a tremor of fear and indignation. Ofcourse, she would not admit even the possibility of his guilt. Butshe would not express either surprise or regret over the fate ofOldacre. On the contrary, she spoke of him with such bitterness thatshe was unconsciously considerably strengthening the case of thepolice, for, of course, if her son had heard her speak of the man inthis fashion it would predispose him towards hatred and violence. 'Hewas more like a malignant and cunning ape than a human being,' saidshe, 'and he always was, ever since he was a young man.'
"'You knew him at that time?' said I.
"'Yes, I knew him well; in fact, he was an old suitor of mine. ThankHeaven that I had the sense to turn away from him and to marry abetter, if a poorer, man. I was engaged to him, Mr. Holmes, when Iheard a shocking story of how he had turned a cat loose in an aviary,and I was so horrified at his brutal cruelty that I would havenothing more to do with him.' She rummaged in a bureau, and presentlyshe produced a photograph of a woman, shamefully defaced andmutilated with a knife. 'That is my own photograph,' she said. 'Hesent it to me in that state, with his curse, upon my weddingmorning.'
"'Well,' said I, 'at least he has forgiven you now, since he has leftall his property to your son.'
"'Neither my son nor I want anything from Jonas Oldacre, dead oralive,' she cried, with a proper spirit. 'There is a God in Heaven,Mr. Holmes, and that same God who has punished that wicked man willshow in His own good time that my son's hands are guiltless of hisblood.'
"Well, I tried one or two leads, but could get at nothing which wouldhelp our hypothesis, and several points which would make against it.I gave it up at last and off I went to Norwood.
"This place, Deep Dene House, is a big modern villa of staring brick,standing back in its own grounds, with a laurel-clumped lawn in frontof it. To the right and some distance back from the road was thetimber-yard which had been the scene of the fire. Here's a rough planon a leaf of my note-book. This window on the left is the one whichopens into Oldacre's room. You can look into it from the road, yousee. That is about the only bit of consolation I have had to-day.Lestrade was not there, but his head constable did the honours. Theyhad just made a great treasure-trove. They had spent the morningraking among the ashes of the burned wood-pile, and besides thecharred organic remains they had secured several discoloured metaldiscs. I examined them with care, and there was no doubt that theywere trouser buttons. I even distinguished that one of them wasmarked with the name of 'Hyams,' who was Oldacre's tailor. I thenworked the lawn very carefully for signs and traces, but this droughthas made everything as hard as iron. Nothing was to be seen save thatsome body or bundle had been dragged through a low privet hedge whichis in a line with the wood-pile. All that, of course, fits in withthe official theory. I crawled about the lawn with an August sun onmy back, but I got up at the end of an hour no wiser than before.
"Well, after this fiasco I went into the bedroom and examined thatalso. The blood-stains were very slight, mere smears anddiscolorations, but undoubtedly fresh. The stick had been removed,but there also the marks were slight. There is no doubt about thestick belonging to our client. He admits it. Footmarks of both mencould be made out on the carpet, but none of any third person, whichagain is a trick for the other side. They were piling up their scoreall the time and we were at a standstill.
"Only one little gleam of hope did I get--and yet it amounted tonothing. I examined the contents of the safe, most of which had beentaken out and left on the table. The papers had been made up intosealed envelopes, one or two of which had been opened by the police.They were not, so far as I could judge, of any great value, nor didthe bank-book show that Mr. Oldacre was in such very affluentcircumstances. But it seemed to me that all the papers were notthere. There were allusions to some deeds--possibly the morevaluable--which I could not find. This, of course, if we coulddefinitely prove it, would turn Lestrade's argument against himself,for who would steal a thing if he knew that he would shortly inheritit?
"Finally, having drawn every other cover and picked up no scent, Itried my luck with the housekeeper. Mrs. Lexington is her name, alittle, dark, silent person, with suspicious and sidelong eyes. Shecould tell us something if she would--I am convinced of it. But shewas as close as wax. Yes, she had let Mr. McFarlane in at half-pastnine. She wished her hand had withered before she had done so. Shehad gone to bed at half-past ten. Her room was at the other end ofthe house, and she could hear nothing of what passed. Mr. McFarlanehad left his hat, and to the best of her belief his stick, in thehall. She had been awakened by the alarm of fire. Her poor, dearmaster had certainly been murdered. Had he any enemies? Well, everyman had enemies, but Mr. Oldacre kept himself very much to himself,and only met people in the way of business. She had seen the buttons,and was sure that they belonged to the clothes which he had worn lastnight. The wood-pile was very dry, for it had not rained for a month.It burned like tinder, and by the time she reached the spot nothingcould be seen but flames. She and all the firemen smelled the burnedflesh from inside it. She knew nothing of the papers, nor of Mr.Oldacre's private affairs.
"So, my dear Watson, there's my report of a failure. And yet--andyet--"--he clenched his thin hands in a paroxysm of conviction--"Iknow it's all wrong. I feel it in my bones. There is something thathas not come out, and that housekeeper knows it. There was a sort ofsulky defiance in her eyes, which only goes with guilty knowledge.However, there's no good talking any more about it, Watson; butunless some lucky chance comes our way I fear that the NorwoodDisappearance Case will not figure in that chronicle of our successeswhich I foresee that a patient public will sooner or later have toendure."
"Surely," said I, "the man's appearance would go far with any jury?"
"That is a dangerous argument, my dear Watson. You remember thatterrible murderer, Bert Stevens, who wanted us to get him off in '87?Was there ever a more mild-mannered, Sunday-school young man?"
"It is true."
"Unless we succeed in establishing an alternative theory this man islost. You can hardly find a flaw in the case which can now bepresented against him, and all further investigation has served tostrengthen it. By the way, there is one curious little point aboutthose papers which may serve us as the starting-point for an inquiry.On looking over the bank-book I found that the low state of thebalance was principally due to large cheques which have been made outduring the last year to Mr. Cornelius. I confess that I should beinterested to know who this Mr. Cornelius may be with whom a retiredbuilder has such very large transactions. Is it possible that he hashad a hand in the affair? Cornelius might be a broker, but we havefound no scrip to correspond with these large payments. Failing anyother indication my researches must now take the direction of aninquiry at the bank for the gentleman who has cashed these cheques.But I fear, my dear fellow, that our case will end ingloriously byLestrade hanging our client, which will certainly be a triumph forScotland Yard."
I do not know how far Sherlock Holmes took any sleep that night, butwhen I came down to breakfast I found him pale and harassed, hisbright eyes the brighter for the dark shadows round them. The carpetround his chair was littered with cigarette-ends and with the earlyeditions of the morning papers. An open telegram lay upon the table.
"What do you think of this, Watson?" he asked, tossing it across.
It was from Norwood, and ran as follows:
"Important fresh evidence to hand. McFarlane's guilt definitelyestablished. Advise you to abandon case.Lestrade.
"This sounds serious," said I.
"It is Lestrade's little cock-a-doodle of victory," Holmes answered,with a bitter smile. "And yet it may be premature to abandon thecase. After all, important fresh evidence is a two-edged thing, andmay possibly cut in a very different direction to that which Lestradeimagines. Take your breakfast, Watson, and we will go out togetherand see what we can do. I feel as if I shall need your company andyour moral support to-day."
My friend had no breakfast himself, for it was one of hispeculiarities that in his more intense moments he would permithimself no food, and I have known him presume upon his iron strengthuntil he has fainted from pure inanition. "At present I cannot spareenergy and nerve force for digestion," he would say in answer to mymedical remonstrances. I was not surprised, therefore, when thismorning he left his untouched meal behind him and started with me forNorwood. A crowd of morbid sightseers were still gathered round DeepDene House, which was just such a suburban villa as I had pictured.Within the gates Lestrade met us, his face flushed with victory, hismanner grossly triumphant.
"Well, Mr. Holmes, have you proved us to be wrong yet? Have you foundyour tramp?" he cried.
"I have formed no conclusion whatever," my companion answered.
"But we formed ours yesterday, and now it proves to be correct; soyou must acknowledge that we have been a little in front of you thistime, Mr. Holmes."
"You certainly have the air of something unusual having occurred,"said Holmes.
Lestrade laughed loudly.
"You don't like being beaten any more than the rest of us do," saidhe. "A man can't expect always to have it his own way, can he, Dr.Watson? Step this way, if you please, gentlemen, and I think I canconvince you once for all that it was John McFarlane who did thiscrime."
He led us through the passage and out into a dark hall beyond.
"This is where young McFarlane must have come out to get his hatafter the crime was done," said he. "Now, look at this." Withdramatic suddenness he struck a match and by its light exposed astain of blood upon the whitewashed wall. As he held the match nearerI saw that it was more than a stain. It was the well-marked print ofa thumb.
"Look at that with your magnifying glass, Mr. Holmes."
"Yes, I am doing so."
"You are aware that no two thumb marks are alike?"
"I have heard something of the kind."
"Well, then, will you please compare that print with this waximpression of young McFarlane's right thumb, taken by my orders thismorning?"
As he held the waxen print close to the blood-stain it did not take amagnifying glass to see that the two were undoubtedly from the samethumb. It was evident to me that our unfortunate client was lost.
"That is final," said Lestrade.
"Yes, that is final," I involuntarily echoed.
"It is final," said Holmes.
Something in his tone caught my ear, and I turned to look at him. Anextraordinary change had come over his face. It was writhing withinward merriment. His two eyes were shining like stars. It seemed tome that he was making desperate efforts to restrain a convulsiveattack of laughter.
"Dear me! Dear me!" he said at last. "Well, now, who would havethought it? And how deceptive appearances may be, to be sure! Such anice young man to look at! It is a lesson to us not to trust our ownjudgment, is it not, Lestrade?"
"Yes, some of us are a little too much inclined to be cocksure, Mr.Holmes," said Lestrade. The man's insolence was maddening, but wecould not resent it.
"What a providential thing that this young man should press his rightthumb against the wall in taking his hat from the peg! Such a verynatural action, too, if you come to think of it." Holmes wasoutwardly calm, but his whole body gave a wriggle of suppressedexcitement as he spoke. "By the way, Lestrade, who made thisremarkable discovery?"
"It was the housekeeper, Mrs. Lexington, who drew the nightconstable's attention to it."
"Where was the night constable?"
"He remained on guard in the bedroom where the crime was committed,so as to see that nothing was touched."
"But why didn't the police see this mark yesterday?"
"Well, we had no particular reason to make a careful examination ofthe hall. Besides, it's not in a very prominent place, as you see."
"No, no, of course not. I suppose there is no doubt that the mark wasthere yesterday?"
Lestrade looked at Holmes as if he thought he was going out of hismind. I confess that I was myself surprised both at his hilariousmanner and at his rather wild observation.
"I don't know whether you think that McFarlane came out of jail inthe dead of the night in order to strengthen the evidence againsthimself," said Lestrade. "I leave it to any expert in the worldwhether that is not the mark of his thumb."
"It is unquestionably the mark of his thumb."
"There, that's enough," said Lestrade. "I am a practical man, Mr.Holmes, and when I have got my evidence I come to my conclusions. Ifyou have anything to say you will find me writing my report in thesitting-room."
Holmes had recovered his equanimity, though I still seemed to detectgleams of amusement in his expression.
"Dear me, this is a very sad development, Watson, is it not?" saidhe. "And yet there are singular points about it which hold out somehopes for our client."
"I am delighted to hear it," said I, heartily. "I was afraid it wasall up with him."
"I would hardly go so far as to say that, my dear Watson. The fact isthat there is one really serious flaw in this evidence to which ourfriend attaches so much importance."
"Indeed, Holmes! What is it?"
"Only this: that I know that that mark was not there when I examinedthe hall yesterday. And now, Watson, let us have a little strollround in the sunshine."
With a confused brain, but with a heart into which some warmth ofhope was returning, I accompanied my friend in a walk round thegarden. Holmes took each face of the house in turn and examined itwith great interest. He then led the way inside and went over thewhole building from basement to attics. Most of the rooms wereunfurnished, but none the less Holmes inspected them all minutely.Finally, on the top corridor, which ran outside three untenantedbedrooms, he again was seized with a spasm of merriment.
"There are really some very unique features about this case, Watson,"said he. "I think it is time now that we took our friend Lestradeinto our confidence. He has had his little smile at our expense, andperhaps we may do as much by him if my reading of this problem provesto be correct. Yes, yes; I think I see how we should approach it."
The Scotland Yard inspector was still writing in the parlour whenHolmes interrupted him.
"I understood that you were writing a report of this case," said he.
"So I am."
"Don't you think it may be a little premature? I can't help thinkingthat your evidence is not complete."
Lestrade knew my friend too well to disregard his words. He laid downhis pen and looked curiously at him.
"What do you mean, Mr. Holmes?"
"Only that there is an important witness whom you have not seen."
"Can you produce him?"
"I think I can."
"Then do so."
"I will do my best. How many constables have you?"
"There are three within call."
"Excellent!" said Holmes. "May I ask if they are all large,able-bodied men with powerful voices?"
"I have no doubt they are, though I fail to see what their voiceshave to do with it."
"Perhaps I can help you to see that and one or two other things aswell," said Holmes. "Kindly summon your men, and I will try."
Five minutes later three policemen had assembled in the hall.
"In the outhouse you will find a considerable quantity of straw,"said Holmes. "I will ask you to carry in two bundles of it. I thinkit will be of the greatest assistance in producing the witness whom Irequire. Thank you very much. I believe you have some matches in yourpocket, Watson. Now, Mr. Lestrade, I will ask you all to accompany meto the top landing."
As I have said, there was a broad corridor there, which ran outsidethree empty bedrooms. At one end of the corridor we were allmarshalled by Sherlock Holmes, the constables grinning and Lestradestaring at my friend with amazement, expectation, and derisionchasing each other across his features. Holmes stood before us withthe air of a conjurer who is performing a trick.
"Would you kindly send one of your constables for two buckets ofwater? Put the straw on the floor here, free from the wall on eitherside. Now I think that we are all ready."
Lestrade's face had begun to grow red and angry.
"I don't know whether you are playing a game with us, Mr. SherlockHolmes," said he. "If you know anything, you can surely say itwithout all this tomfoolery."
"I assure you, my good Lestrade, that I have an excellent reason foreverything that I do. You may possibly remember that you chaffed me alittle some hours ago, when the sun seemed on your side of the hedge,so you must not grudge me a little pomp and ceremony now. Might I askyou, Watson, to open that window, and then to put a match to the edgeof the straw?"
I did so, and, driven by the draught, a coil of grey smoke swirleddown the corridor, while the dry straw crackled and flamed.
"Now we must see if we can find this witness for you, Lestrade. MightI ask you all to join in the cry of 'Fire!'? Now, then; one, two,three--"
"Fire!" we all yelled.
"Thank you. I will trouble you once again."
"Fire!"
"Just once more, gentlemen, and all together."
"Fire!" The shout must have rung over Norwood.
It had hardly died away when an amazing thing happened. A doorsuddenly flew open out of what appeared to be solid wall at the endof the corridor, and a little, wizened man darted out of it, like arabbit out of its burrow.
"Capital!" said Holmes, calmly. "Watson, a bucket of water over thestraw. That will do! Lestrade, allow me to present you with yourprincipal missing witness, Mr. Jonas Oldacre."
The detective stared at the new-comer with blank amazement. Thelatter was blinking in the bright light of the corridor, and peeringat us and at the smouldering fire. It was an odious face--crafty,vicious, malignant, with shifty, light-grey eyes and white eyelashes.
"What's this, then?" said Lestrade at last. "What have you been doingall this time, eh?"
Oldacre gave an uneasy laugh, shrinking back from the furious redface of the angry detective.
"I have done no harm."
"No harm? You have done your best to get an innocent man hanged. Ifit wasn't for this gentleman here, I am not sure that you would nothave succeeded."
The wretched creature began to whimper.
"I am sure, sir, it was only my practical joke."
"Oh! a joke, was it? You won't find the laugh on your side, I promiseyou. Take him down and keep him in the sitting-room until I come. Mr.Holmes," he continued, when they had gone, "I could not speak beforethe constables, but I don't mind saying, in the presence of Dr.Watson, that this is the brightest thing that you have done yet,though it is a mystery to me how you did it. You have saved aninnocent man's life, and you have prevented a very grave scandal,which would have ruined my reputation in the Force."
Holmes smiled and clapped Lestrade upon the shoulder.
"Instead of being ruined, my good sir, you will find that yourreputation has been enormously enhanced. Just make a few alterationsin that report which you were writing, and they will understand howhard it is to throw dust in the eyes of Inspector Lestrade."
"And you don't want your name to appear?"
"Not at all. The work is its own reward. Perhaps I shall get thecredit also at some distant day when I permit my zealous historian tolay out his foolscap once more--eh, Watson? Well, now, let us seewhere this rat has been lurking."
A lath-and-plaster partition had been run across the passage six feetfrom the end, with a door cunningly concealed in it. It was litwithin by slits under the eaves. A few articles of furniture and asupply of food and water were within, together with a number of booksand papers.
"There's the advantage of being a builder," said Holmes, as we cameout. "He was able to fix up his own little hiding-place without anyconfederate--save, of course, that precious housekeeper of his, whomI should lose no time in adding to your bag, Lestrade."
"I'll take your advice. But how did you know of this place, Mr.Holmes?"
"I made up my mind that the fellow was in hiding in the house. When Ipaced one corridor and found it six feet shorter than thecorresponding one below, it was pretty clear where he was. I thoughthe had not the nerve to lie quiet before an alarm of fire. We could,of course, have gone in and taken him, but it amused me to make himreveal himself; besides, I owed you a little mystification, Lestrade,for your chaff in the morning."
"Well, sir, you certainly got equal with me on that. But how in theworld did you know that he was in the house at all?"
"The thumb-mark, Lestrade. You said it was final; and so it was, in avery different sense. I knew it had not been there the day before. Ipay a good deal of attention to matters of detail, as you may haveobserved, and I had examined the hall and was sure that the wall wasclear. Therefore, it had been put on during the night."
"But how?"
"Very simply. When those packets were sealed up, Jonas Oldacre gotMcFarlane to secure one of the seals by putting his thumb upon thesoft wax. It would be done so quickly and so naturally that I daresay the young man himself has no recollection of it. Very likely itjust so happened, and Oldacre had himself no notion of the use hewould put it to. Brooding over the case in that den of his, itsuddenly struck him what absolutely damning evidence he could makeagainst McFarlane by using that thumb-mark. It was the simplest thingin the world for him to take a wax impression from the seal, tomoisten it in as much blood as he could get from a pin-prick, and toput the mark upon the wall during the night, either with his own handor with that of his housekeeper. If you examine among those documentswhich he took with him into his retreat I will lay you a wager thatyou find the seal with the thumb-mark upon it."
"Wonderful!" said Lestrade. "Wonderful! It's all as clear as crystal,as you put it. But what is the object of this deep deception, Mr.Holmes?"
It was amusing to me to see how the detective's overbearing mannerhad changed suddenly to that of a child asking questions of itsteacher.
"Well, I don't think that is very hard to explain. A very deep,malicious, vindictive person is the gentleman who is now awaiting usdownstairs. You know that he was once refused by McFarlane's mother?You don't! I told you that you should go to Blackheath first andNorwood afterwards. Well, this injury, as he would consider it, hasrankled in his wicked, scheming brain, and all his life he has longedfor vengeance, but never seen his chance. During the last year or twothings have gone against him--secret speculation, I think--and hefinds himself in a bad way. He determines to swindle his creditors,and for this purpose he pays large cheques to a certain Mr.Cornelius, who is, I imagine, himself under another name. I have nottraced these cheques yet, but I have no doubt that they were bankedunder that name at some provincial town where Oldacre from time totime led a double existence. He intended to change his namealtogether, draw this money, and vanish, starting life againelsewhere."
"Well, that's likely enough."
"It would strike him that in disappearing he might throw all pursuitoff his track, and at the same time have an ample and crushingrevenge upon his old sweetheart, if he could give the impression thathe had been murdered by her only child. It was a masterpiece ofvillainy, and he carried it out like a master. The idea of the will,which would give an obvious motive for the crime, the secret visitunknown to his own parents, the retention of the stick, the blood,and the animal remains and buttons in the wood-pile, all wereadmirable. It was a net from which it seemed to me a few hours agothat there was no possible escape. But he had not that supreme giftof the artist, the knowledge of when to stop. He wished to improvethat which was already perfect--to draw the rope tighter yet roundthe neck of his unfortunate victim--and so he ruined all. Let usdescend, Lestrade. There are just one or two questions that I wouldask him."
The malignant creature was seated in his own parlour with a policemanupon each side of him.
"It was a joke, my good sir, a practical joke, nothing more," hewhined incessantly. "I assure you, sir, that I simply concealedmyself in order to see the effect of my disappearance, and I am surethat you would not be so unjust as to imagine that I would haveallowed any harm to befall poor young Mr. McFarlane."
"That's for a jury to decide," said Lestrade. "Anyhow, we shall haveyou on a charge of conspiracy, if not for attempted murder."
"And you'll probably find that your creditors will impound thebanking account of Mr. Cornelius," said Holmes.
The little man started and turned his malignant eyes upon my friend.
"I have to thank you for a good deal," said he. "Perhaps I'll pay mydebt some day."
Holmes smiled indulgently.
"I fancy that for some few years you will find your time very fullyoccupied," said he. "By the way, what was it you put into thewood-pile besides your old trousers? A dead dog, or rabbits, or what?You won't tell? Dear me, how very unkind of you! Well, well, I daresay that a couple of rabbits would account both for the blood and forthe charred ashes. If ever you write an account, Watson, you can makerabbits serve your turn."





                   THE ADVENTURE OF THE DANCING MEN
Holmes had been seated for some hours in silence with his long, thinback curved over a chemical vessel in which he was brewing aparticularly malodorous product. His head was sunk upon his breast,and he looked from my point of view like a strange, lank bird, withdull grey plumage and a black top-knot.
"So, Watson," said he, suddenly, "you do not propose to invest inSouth African securities?"
I gave a start of astonishment. Accustomed as I was to Holmes'scurious faculties, this sudden intrusion into my most intimatethoughts was utterly inexplicable.
"How on earth do you know that?" I asked.
He wheeled round upon his stool, with a steaming test-tube in hishand and a gleam of amusement in his deep-set eyes.
"Now, Watson, confess yourself utterly taken aback," said he.
"I am."
"I ought to make you sign a paper to that effect."
"Why?"
"Because in five minutes you will say that it is all so absurdlysimple."
"I am sure that I shall say nothing of the kind."
"You see, my dear Watson"--he propped his test-tube in the rack andbegan to lecture with the air of a professor addressing hisclass--"it is not really difficult to construct a series ofinferences, each dependent upon its predecessor and each simple initself. If, after doing so, one simply knocks out all the centralinferences and presents one's audience with the starting-point andthe conclusion, one may produce a startling, though possibly ameretricious, effect. Now, it was not really difficult, by aninspection of the groove between your left forefinger and thumb, tofeel sure that you did not propose to invest your small capital inthe goldfields."
"I see no connection."
"Very likely not; but I can quickly show you a close connection. Hereare the missing links of the very simple chain: 1. You had chalkbetween your left finger and thumb when you returned from the clublast night. 2. You put chalk there when you play billiards to steadythe cue. 3. You never play billiards except with Thurston. 4. Youtold me four weeks ago that Thurston had an option on some SouthAfrican property which would expire in a month, and which he desiredyou to share with him. 5. Your cheque-book is locked in my drawer,and you have not asked for the key. 6. You do not propose to investyour money in this manner."
"How absurdly simple!" I cried.
"Quite so!" said he, a little nettled. "Every problem becomes verychildish when once it is explained to you. Here is an unexplainedone. See what you can make of that, friend Watson." He tossed a sheetof paper upon the table and turned once more to his chemicalanalysis.
I looked with amazement at the absurd hieroglyphics upon the paper.
"Why, Holmes, it is a child's drawing," I cried.
"Oh, that's your idea!"
"What else should it be?"
"That is what Mr. Hilton Cubitt, of Ridling Thorpe Manor, Norfolk, isvery anxious to know. This little conundrum came by the first post,and he was to follow by the next train. There's a ring at the bell,Watson. I should not be very much surprised if this were he."
A heavy step was heard upon the stairs, and an instant later thereentered a tall, ruddy, clean-shaven gentleman, whose clear eyes andflorid cheeks told of a life led far from the fogs of Baker Street.He seemed to bring a whiff of his strong, fresh, bracing, east-coastair with him as he entered. Having shaken hands with each of us, hewas about to sit down when his eye rested upon the paper with thecurious markings, which I had just examined and left upon the table.
"Well, Mr. Holmes, what do you make of these?" he cried. "They toldme that you were fond of queer mysteries, and I don't think you canfind a queerer one than that. I sent the paper on ahead so that youmight have time to study it before I came."
"It is certainly rather a curious production," said Holmes. "At firstsight it would appear to be some childish prank. It consists of anumber of absurd little figures dancing across the paper upon whichthey are drawn. Why should you attribute any importance to sogrotesque an object?"
"I never should, Mr. Holmes. But my wife does. It is frightening herto death. She says nothing, but I can see terror in her eyes. That'swhy I want to sift the matter to the bottom."
Holmes held up the paper so that the sunlight shone full upon it. Itwas a page torn from a note-book. The markings were done in pencil,and ran in this way:--
[ Picture: Picture of several figures of dancing men, some holdingflags ]
Holmes examined it for some time, and then, folding it carefully up,he placed it in his pocket-book.
"This promises to be a most interesting and unusual case," said he."You gave me a few particulars in your letter, Mr. Hilton Cubitt, butI should be very much obliged if you would kindly go over it allagain for the benefit of my friend, Dr. Watson."
"I'm not much of a story-teller," said our visitor, nervouslyclasping and unclasping his great, strong hands. "You'll just ask meanything that I don't make clear. I'll begin at the time of mymarriage last year; but I want to say first of all that, though I'mnot a rich man, my people have been at Ridling Thorpe for a matter offive centuries, and there is no better known family in the County ofNorfolk. Last year I came up to London for the Jubilee, and I stoppedat a boarding-house in Russell Square, because Parker, the vicar ofour parish, was staying in it. There was an American young ladythere--Patrick was the name--Elsie Patrick. In some way we becamefriends, until before my month was up I was as much in love as a mancould be. We were quietly married at a registry office, and wereturned to Norfolk a wedded couple. You'll think it very mad, Mr.Holmes, that a man of a good old family should marry a wife in thisfashion, knowing nothing of her past or of her people; but if you sawher and knew her it would help you to understand.
"She was very straight about it, was Elsie. I can't say that she didnot give me every chance of getting out of it if I wished to do so.'I have had some very disagreeable associations in my life,' saidshe; 'I wish to forget all about them. I would rather never allude tothe past, for it is very painful to me. If you take me, Hilton, youwill take a woman who has nothing that she need be personally ashamedof; but you will have to be content with my word for it, and to allowme to be silent as to all that passed up to the time when I becameyours. If these conditions are too hard, then go back to Norfolk andleave me to the lonely life in which you found me.' It was only theday before our wedding that she said those very words to me. I toldher that I was content to take her on her own terms, and I have beenas good as my word.
"Well, we have been married now for a year, and very happy we havebeen. But about a month ago, at the end of June, I saw for the firsttime signs of trouble. One day my wife received a letter fromAmerica. I saw the American stamp. She turned deadly white, read theletter, and threw it into the fire. She made no allusion to itafterwards, and I made none, for a promise is a promise; but she hasnever known an easy hour from that moment. There is always a look offear upon her face--a look as if she were waiting and expecting. Shewould do better to trust me. She would find that I was her bestfriend. But until she speaks I can say nothing. Mind you, she is atruthful woman, Mr. Holmes, and whatever trouble there may have beenin her past life it has been no fault of hers. I am only a simpleNorfolk squire, but there is not a man in England who ranks hisfamily honour more highly than I do. She knows it well, and she knewit well before she married me. She would never bring any stain uponit--of that I am sure.
"Well, now I come to the queer part of my story. About a week ago--itwas the Tuesday of last week--I found on one of the window-sills anumber of absurd little dancing figures, like these upon the paper.They were scrawled with chalk. I thought that it was the stable-boywho had drawn them, but the lad swore he knew nothing about it.Anyhow, they had come there during the night. I had them washed out,and I only mentioned the matter to my wife afterwards. To my surpriseshe took it very seriously, and begged me if any more came to let hersee them. None did come for a week, and then yesterday morning Ifound this paper lying on the sun-dial in the garden. I showed it toElsie, and down she dropped in a dead faint. Since then she haslooked like a woman in a dream, half dazed, and with terror alwayslurking in her eyes. It was then that I wrote and sent the paper toyou, Mr. Holmes. It was not a thing that I could take to the police,for they would have laughed at me, but you will tell me what to do. Iam not a rich man; but if there is any danger threatening my littlewoman I would spend my last copper to shield her."
He was a fine creature, this man of the old English soil, simple,straight, and gentle, with his great, earnest blue eyes and broad,comely face. His love for his wife and his trust in her shone in hisfeatures. Holmes had listened to his story with the utmost attention,and now he sat for some time in silent thought.
"Don't you think, Mr. Cubitt," said he, at last, "that your best planwould be to make a direct appeal to your wife, and to ask her toshare her secret with you?"
Hilton Cubitt shook his massive head.
"A promise is a promise, Mr. Holmes. If Elsie wished to tell me shewould. If not, it is not for me to force her confidence. But I amjustified in taking my own line--and I will."
"Then I will help you with all my heart. In the first place, have youheard of any strangers being seen in your neighbourhood?"
"No."
"I presume that it is a very quiet place. Any fresh face would causecomment?"
"In the immediate neighbourhood, yes. But we have several smallwatering-places not very far away. And the farmers take in lodgers."
"These hieroglyphics have evidently a meaning. If it is a purelyarbitrary one it may be impossible for us to solve it. If, on theother hand, it is systematic, I have no doubt that we shall get tothe bottom of it. But this particular sample is so short that I cando nothing, and the facts which you have brought me are so indefinitethat we have no basis for an investigation. I would suggest that youreturn to Norfolk, that you keep a keen look-out, and that you takean exact copy of any fresh dancing men which may appear. It is athousand pities that we have not a reproduction of those which weredone in chalk upon the window-sill. Make a discreet inquiry also asto any strangers in the neighbourhood. When you have collected somefresh evidence come to me again. That is the best advice which I cangive you, Mr. Hilton Cubitt. If there are any pressing freshdevelopments I shall be always ready to run down and see you in yourNorfolk home."
The interview left Sherlock Holmes very thoughtful, and several timesin the next few days I saw him take his slip of paper from hisnote-book and look long and earnestly at the curious figuresinscribed upon it. He made no allusion to the affair, however, untilone afternoon a fortnight or so later. I was going out when he calledme back.
"You had better stay here, Watson."
"Why?"
"Because I had a wire from Hilton Cubitt this morning--you rememberHilton Cubitt, of the dancing men? He was to reach Liverpool Streetat one-twenty. He may be here at any moment. I gather from his wirethat there have been some new incidents of importance."
We had not long to wait, for our Norfolk squire came straight fromthe station as fast as a hansom could bring him. He was lookingworried and depressed, with tired eyes and a lined forehead.
"It's getting on my nerves, this business, Mr. Holmes," said he, ashe sank, like a wearied man, into an arm-chair. "It's bad enough tofeel that you are surrounded by unseen, unknown folk, who have somekind of design upon you; but when, in addition to that, you know thatit is just killing your wife by inches, then it becomes as much asflesh and blood can endure. She's wearing away under it--just wearingaway before my eyes."
"Has she said anything yet?"
"No, Mr. Holmes, she has not. And yet there have been times when thepoor girl has wanted to speak, and yet could not quite bring herselfto take the plunge. I have tried to help her; but I dare say I did itclumsily, and scared her off from it. She has spoken about my oldfamily, and our reputation in the county, and our pride in ourunsullied honour, and I always felt it was leading to the point; butsomehow it turned off before we got there."
"But you have found out something for yourself?"
"A good deal, Mr. Holmes. I have several fresh dancing men picturesfor you to examine, and, what is more important, I have seen thefellow."
"What, the man who draws them?"
"Yes, I saw him at his work. But I will tell you everything in order.When I got back after my visit to you, the very first thing I sawnext morning was a fresh crop of dancing men. They had been drawn inchalk upon the black wooden door of the tool-house, which standsbeside the lawn in full view of the front windows. I took an exactcopy, and here it is." He unfolded a paper and laid it upon thetable. Here is a copy of the hieroglyphics:--
[ Picture: Picture of a few dancing men ]
"Excellent!" said Holmes. "Excellent! Pray continue."
"When I had taken the copy I rubbed out the marks; but two morningslater a fresh inscription had appeared. I have a copy of it here":--
[ Picture: Picture of some more dancing man figures ]
Holmes rubbed his hands and chuckled with delight.
"Our material is rapidly accumulating," said he.
"Three days later a message was left scrawled upon paper, and placedunder a pebble upon the sun-dial. Here it is. The characters are, asyou see, exactly the same as the last one. After that I determined tolie in wait; so I got out my revolver and I sat up in my study, whichoverlooks the lawn and garden. About two in the morning I was seatedby the window, all being dark save for the moonlight outside, when Iheard steps behind me, and there was my wife in her dressing-gown.She implored me to come to bed. I told her frankly that I wished tosee who it was who played such absurd tricks upon us. She answeredthat it was some senseless practical joke, and that I should not takeany notice of it.
"'If it really annoys you, Hilton, we might go and travel, you and I,and so avoid this nuisance.'
"'What, be driven out of our own house by a practical joker?' said I.'Why, we should have the whole county laughing at us.'
"'Well, come to bed,' said she, 'and we can discuss it in themorning.'
"Suddenly, as she spoke, I saw her white face grow whiter yet in themoonlight, and her hand tightened upon my shoulder. Something wasmoving in the shadow of the tool-house. I saw a dark, creeping figurewhich crawled round the corner and squatted in front of the door.Seizing my pistol I was rushing out, when my wife threw her armsround me and held me with convulsive strength. I tried to throw heroff, but she clung to me most desperately. At last I got clear, butby the time I had opened the door and reached the house the creaturewas gone. He had left a trace of his presence, however, for there onthe door was the very same arrangement of dancing men which hadalready twice appeared, and which I have copied on that paper. Therewas no other sign of the fellow anywhere, though I ran all over thegrounds. And yet the amazing thing is that he must have been thereall the time, for when I examined the door again in the morning hehad scrawled some more of his pictures under the line which I hadalready seen."
"Have you that fresh drawing?"
"Yes; it is very short, but I made a copy of it, and here it is."
Again he produced a paper. The new dance was in this form:--
[ Picture: Picture of five dancing men figures ]
"Tell me," said Holmes--and I could see by his eyes that he was muchexcited--"was this a mere addition to the first, or did it appear tobe entirely separate?"
"It was on a different panel of the door."
"Excellent! This is far the most important of all for our purpose. Itfills me with hopes. Now, Mr. Hilton Cubitt, please continue yourmost interesting statement."
"I have nothing more to say, Mr. Holmes, except that I was angry withmy wife that night for having held me back when I might have caughtthe skulking rascal. She said that she feared that I might come toharm. For an instant it had crossed my mind that perhaps what shereally feared was that he might come to harm, for I could not doubtthat she knew who this man was and what he meant by these strangesignals. But there is a tone in my wife's voice, Mr. Holmes, and alook in her eyes which forbid doubt, and I am sure that it was indeedmy own safety that was in her mind. There's the whole case, and now Iwant your advice as to what I ought to do. My own inclination is toput half-a-dozen of my farm lads in the shrubbery, and when thisfellow comes again to give him such a hiding that he will leave us inpeace for the future."
"I fear it is too deep a case for such simple remedies," said Holmes."How long can you stay in London?"
"I must go back to-day. I would not leave my wife alone all night foranything. She is very nervous and begged me to come back."
"I dare say you are right. But if you could have stopped I mightpossibly have been able to return with you in a day or two. Meanwhileyou will leave me these papers, and I think that it is very likelythat I shall be able to pay you a visit shortly and to throw somelight upon your case."
Sherlock Holmes preserved his calm professional manner until ourvisitor had left us, although it was easy for me, who knew him sowell, to see that he was profoundly excited. The moment that HiltonCubitt's broad back had disappeared through the door my comraderushed to the table, laid out all the slips of paper containingdancing men in front of him, and threw himself into an intricate andelaborate calculation. For two hours I watched him as he coveredsheet after sheet of paper with figures and letters, so completelyabsorbed in his task that he had evidently forgotten my presence.Sometimes he was making progress and whistled and sang at his work;sometimes he was puzzled, and would sit for long spells with afurrowed brow and a vacant eye. Finally he sprang from his chair witha cry of satisfaction, and walked up and down the room rubbing hishands together. Then he wrote a long telegram upon a cable form. "Ifmy answer to this is as I hope, you will have a very pretty case toadd to your collection, Watson," said he. "I expect that we shall beable to go down to Norfolk to-morrow, and to take our friend somevery definite news as to the secret of his annoyance."
I confess that I was filled with curiosity, but I was aware thatHolmes liked to make his disclosures at his own time and in his ownway; so I waited until it should suit him to take me into hisconfidence.
But there was a delay in that answering telegram, and two days ofimpatience followed, during which Holmes pricked up his ears at everyring of the bell. On the evening of the second there came a letterfrom Hilton Cubitt. All was quiet with him, save that a longinscription had appeared that morning upon the pedestal of thesun-dial. He inclosed a copy of it, which is here reproduced:--
[ Picture: Picture of many dancing men figures ]
Holmes bent over this grotesque frieze for some minutes, and thensuddenly sprang to his feet with an exclamation of surprise anddismay. His face was haggard with anxiety.
"We have let this affair go far enough," said he. "Is there a trainto North Walsham to-night?"
I turned up the time-table. The last had just gone.
"Then we shall breakfast early and take the very first in themorning," said Holmes. "Our presence is most urgently needed. Ah!here is our expected cablegram. One moment, Mrs. Hudson; there may bean answer. No, that is quite as I expected. This message makes iteven more essential that we should not lose an hour in letting HiltonCubitt know how matters stand, for it is a singular and a dangerousweb in which our simple Norfolk squire is entangled."
So, indeed, it proved, and as I come to the dark conclusion of astory which had seemed to me to be only childish and bizarre Iexperience once again the dismay and horror with which I was filled.Would that I had some brighter ending to communicate to my readers,but these are the chronicles of fact, and I must follow to their darkcrisis the strange chain of events which for some days made RidlingThorpe Manor a household word through the length and breadth ofEngland.
We had hardly alighted at North Walsham, and mentioned the name ofour destination, when the station-master hurried towards us. "Isuppose that you are the detectives from London?" said he.
A look of annoyance passed over Holmes's face.
"What makes you think such a thing?"
"Because Inspector Martin from Norwich has just passed through. Butmaybe you are the surgeons. She's not dead--or wasn't by lastaccounts. You may be in time to save her yet--though it be for thegallows."
Holmes's brow was dark with anxiety.
"We are going to Ridling Thorpe Manor," said he, "but we have heardnothing of what has passed there."
"It's a terrible business," said the station-master. "They are shot,both Mr. Hilton Cubitt and his wife. She shot him and thenherself--so the servants say. He's dead and her life is despaired of.Dear, dear, one of the oldest families in the County of Norfolk, andone of the most honoured."
Without a word Holmes hurried to a carriage, and during the longseven miles' drive he never opened his mouth. Seldom have I seen himso utterly despondent. He had been uneasy during all our journey fromtown, and I had observed that he had turned over the morning paperswith anxious attention; but now this sudden realization of his worstfears left him in a blank melancholy. He leaned back in his seat,lost in gloomy speculation. Yet there was much around to interest us,for we were passing through as singular a country-side as any inEngland, where a few scattered cottages represented the population ofto-day, while on every hand enormous square-towered churches bristledup from the flat, green landscape and told of the glory andprosperity of old East Anglia. At last the violet rim of the GermanOcean appeared over the green edge of the Norfolk coast, and thedriver pointed with his whip to two old brick and timber gables whichprojected from a grove of trees. "That's Ridling Thorpe Manor," saidhe.
As we drove up to the porticoed front door I observed in front of it,beside the tennis lawn, the black tool-house and the pedestalledsun-dial with which we had such strange associations. A dapper littleman, with a quick, alert manner and a waxed moustache, had justdescended from a high dog-cart. He introduced himself as InspectorMartin, of the Norfolk Constabulary, and he was considerablyastonished when he heard the name of my companion.
"Why, Mr. Holmes, the crime was only committed at three this morning.How could you hear of it in London and get to the spot as soon as I?"
"I anticipated it. I came in the hope of preventing it."
"Then you must have important evidence of which we are ignorant, forthey were said to be a most united couple."
"I have only the evidence of the dancing men," said Holmes. "I willexplain the matter to you later. Meanwhile, since it is too late toprevent this tragedy, I am very anxious that I should use theknowledge which I possess in order to ensure that justice be done.Will you associate me in your investigation, or will you prefer thatI should act independently?"
"I should be proud to feel that we were acting together, Mr. Holmes,"said the inspector, earnestly.
"In that case I should be glad to hear the evidence and to examinethe premises without an instant of unnecessary delay."
Inspector Martin had the good sense to allow my friend to do thingsin his own fashion, and contented himself with carefully noting theresults. The local surgeon, an old, white-haired man, had just comedown from Mrs. Hilton Cubitt's room, and he reported that herinjuries were serious, but not necessarily fatal. The bullet hadpassed through the front of her brain, and it would probably be sometime before she could regain consciousness. On the question ofwhether she had been shot or had shot herself he would not venture toexpress any decided opinion. Certainly the bullet had been dischargedat very close quarters. There was only the one pistol found in theroom, two barrels of which had been emptied. Mr. Hilton Cubitt hadbeen shot through the heart. It was equally conceivable that he hadshot her and then himself, or that she had been the criminal, for therevolver lay upon the floor midway between them.
"Has he been moved?" asked Holmes.
"We have moved nothing except the lady. We could not leave her lyingwounded upon the floor."
"How long have you been here, doctor?"
"Since four o'clock."
"Anyone else?"
"Yes, the constable here."
"And you have touched nothing?"
"Nothing."
"You have acted with great discretion. Who sent for you?"
"The housemaid, Saunders."
"Was it she who gave the alarm?"
"She and Mrs. King, the cook."
"Where are they now?"
"In the kitchen, I believe."
"Then I think we had better hear their story at once."
The old hall, oak-panelled and high-windowed, had been turned into acourt of investigation. Holmes sat in a great, old-fashioned chair,his inexorable eyes gleaming out of his haggard face. I could read inthem a set purpose to devote his life to this quest until the clientwhom he had failed to save should at last be avenged. The trimInspector Martin, the old, grey-headed country doctor, myself, and astolid village policeman made up the rest of that strange company.
The two women told their story clearly enough. They had been arousedfrom their sleep by the sound of an explosion, which had beenfollowed a minute later by a second one. They slept in adjoiningrooms, and Mrs. King had rushed in to Saunders. Together they haddescended the stairs. The door of the study was open and a candle wasburning upon the table. Their master lay upon his face in the centreof the room. He was quite dead. Near the window his wife wascrouching, her head leaning against the wall. She was horriblywounded, and the side of her face was red with blood. She breathedheavily, but was incapable of saying anything. The passage, as wellas the room, was full of smoke and the smell of powder. The windowwas certainly shut and fastened upon the inside. Both women werepositive upon the point. They had at once sent for the doctor and forthe constable. Then, with the aid of the groom and the stable-boy,they had conveyed their injured mistress to her room. Both she andher husband had occupied the bed. She was clad in her dress--he inhis dressing-gown, over his night clothes. Nothing had been moved inthe study. So far as they knew there had never been any quarrelbetween husband and wife. They had always looked upon them as a veryunited couple.
These were the main points of the servants' evidence. In answer toInspector Martin they were clear that every door was fastened uponthe inside, and that no one could have escaped from the house. Inanswer to Holmes they both remembered that they were conscious of thesmell of powder from the moment that they ran out of their rooms uponthe top floor. "I commend that fact very carefully to yourattention," said Holmes to his professional colleague. "And now Ithink that we are in a position to undertake a thorough examinationof the room."
The study proved to be a small chamber, lined on three sides withbooks, and with a writing-table facing an ordinary window, whichlooked out upon the garden. Our first attention was given to the bodyof the unfortunate squire, whose huge frame lay stretched across theroom. His disordered dress showed that he had been hastily arousedfrom sleep. The bullet had been fired at him from the front, and hadremained in his body after penetrating the heart. His death hadcertainly been instantaneous and painless. There was nopowder-marking either upon his dressing-gown or on his hands.According to the country surgeon the lady had stains upon her face,but none upon her hand.
"The absence of the latter means nothing, though its presence maymean everything," said Holmes. "Unless the powder from abadly-fitting cartridge happens to spurt backwards, one may fire manyshots without leaving a sign. I would suggest that Mr. Cubitt's bodymay now be removed. I suppose, doctor, you have not recovered thebullet which wounded the lady?"
"A serious operation will be necessary before that can be done. Butthere are still four cartridges in the revolver. Two have been firedand two wounds inflicted, so that each bullet can be accounted for."
"So it would seem," said Holmes. "Perhaps you can account also forthe bullet which has so obviously struck the edge of the window?"
He had turned suddenly, and his long, thin finger was pointing to ahole which had been drilled right through the lower window-sash aboutan inch above the bottom.
"By George!" cried the inspector. "How ever did you see that?"
"Because I looked for it."
"Wonderful!" said the country doctor. "You are certainly right, sir.Then a third shot has been fired, and therefore a third person musthave been present. But who could that have been and how could he havegot away?"
"That is the problem which we are now about to solve," said SherlockHolmes. "You remember, Inspector Martin, when the servants said thaton leaving their room they were at once conscious of a smell ofpowder I remarked that the point was an extremely important one?"
"Yes, sir; but I confess I did not quite follow you."
"It suggested that at the time of the firing the window as well asthe door of the room had been open. Otherwise the fumes of powdercould not have been blown so rapidly through the house. A draught inthe room was necessary for that. Both door and window were only openfor a very short time, however."
"How do you prove that?"
"Because the candle has not guttered."
"Capital!" cried the inspector. "Capital!"
"Feeling sure that the window had been open at the time of thetragedy I conceived that there might have been a third person in theaffair, who stood outside this opening and fired through it. Any shotdirected at this person might hit the sash. I looked, and there, sureenough, was the bullet mark!"
"But how came the window to be shut and fastened?"
"The woman's first instinct would be to shut and fasten the window.But, halloa! what is this?"
It was a lady's hand-bag which stood upon the study table--a trimlittle hand-bag of crocodile-skin and silver. Holmes opened it andturned the contents out. There were twenty fifty-pound notes of theBank of England, held together by an india-rubber band--nothing else.
"This must be preserved, for it will figure in the trial," saidHolmes, as he handed the bag with its contents to the inspector. "Itis now necessary that we should try to throw some light upon thisthird bullet, which has clearly, from the splintering of the wood,been fired from inside the room. I should like to see Mrs. King, thecook, again. You said, Mrs. King, that you were awakened by a loudexplosion. When you said that, did you mean that it seemed to you tobe louder than the second one?"
"Well, sir, it wakened me from my sleep, and so it is hard to judge.But it did seem very loud."
"You don't think that it might have been two shots fired almost atthe same instant?"
"I am sure I couldn't say, sir."
"I believe that it was undoubtedly so. I rather think, InspectorMartin, that we have now exhausted all that this room can teach us.If you will kindly step round with me, we shall see what freshevidence the garden has to offer."
A flower-bed extended up to the study window, and we all broke intoan exclamation as we approached it. The flowers were trampled down,and the soft soil was imprinted all over with footmarks. Large,masculine feet they were, with peculiarly long, sharp toes. Holmeshunted about among the grass and leaves like a retriever after awounded bird. Then, with a cry of satisfaction, he bent forward andpicked up a little brazen cylinder.
"I thought so," said he; "the revolver had an ejector, and here isthe third cartridge. I really think, Inspector Martin, that our caseis almost complete."
The country inspector's face had shown his intense amazement at therapid and masterful progress of Holmes's investigation. At first hehad shown some disposition to assert his own position; but now he wasovercome with admiration and ready to follow without questionwherever Holmes led.
"Whom do you suspect?" he asked.
"I'll go into that later. There are several points in this problemwhich I have not been able to explain to you yet. Now that I have gotso far I had best proceed on my own lines, and then clear the wholematter up once and for all."
"Just as you wish, Mr. Holmes, so long as we get our man."
"I have no desire to make mysteries, but it is impossible at themoment of action to enter into long and complex explanations. I havethe threads of this affair all in my hand. Even if this lady shouldnever recover consciousness we can still reconstruct the events oflast night and ensure that justice be done. First of all I wish toknow whether there is any inn in this neighbourhood known as'Elrige's'?"
The servants were cross-questioned, but none of them had heard ofsuch a place. The stable-boy threw a light upon the matter byremembering that a farmer of that name lived some miles off in thedirection of East Ruston.
"Is it a lonely farm?"
"Very lonely, sir."
"Perhaps they have not heard yet of all that happened here during thenight?"
"Maybe not, sir."
Holmes thought for a little and then a curious smile played over hisface.
"Saddle a horse, my lad," said he. "I shall wish you to take a noteto Elrige's Farm."
He took from his pocket the various slips of the dancing men. Withthese in front of him he worked for some time at the study-table.Finally he handed a note to the boy, with directions to put it intothe hands of the person to whom it was addressed, and especially toanswer no questions of any sort which might be put to him. I saw theoutside of the note, addressed in straggling, irregular characters,very unlike Holmes's usual precise hand. It was consigned to Mr. AbeSlaney, Elrige's Farm, East Ruston, Norfolk.
"I think, inspector," Holmes remarked, "that you would do well totelegraph for an escort, as, if my calculations prove to be correct,you may have a particularly dangerous prisoner to convey to thecounty jail. The boy who takes this note could no doubt forward yourtelegram. If there is an afternoon train to town, Watson, I think weshould do well to take it, as I have a chemical analysis of someinterest to finish, and this investigation draws rapidly to a close."
When the youth had been dispatched with the note, Sherlock Holmesgave his instructions to the servants. If any visitor were to callasking for Mrs. Hilton Cubitt no information should be given as toher condition, but he was to be shown at once into the drawing-room.He impressed these points upon them with the utmost earnestness.Finally he led the way into the drawing-room with the remark that thebusiness was now out of our hands, and that we must while away thetime as best we might until we could see what was in store for us.The doctor had departed to his patients, and only the inspector andmyself remained.
"I think that I can help you to pass an hour in an interesting andprofitable manner," said Holmes, drawing his chair up to the tableand spreading out in front of him the various papers upon which wererecorded the antics of the dancing men. "As to you, friend Watson, Iowe you every atonement for having allowed your natural curiosity toremain so long unsatisfied. To you, inspector, the whole incident mayappeal as a remarkable professional study. I must tell you first ofall the interesting circumstances connected with the previousconsultations which Mr. Hilton Cubitt has had with me in BakerStreet." He then shortly recapitulated the facts which have alreadybeen recorded. "I have here in front of me these singularproductions, at which one might smile had they not proved themselvesto be the fore-runners of so terrible a tragedy. I am fairly familiarwith all forms of secret writings, and am myself the author of atrifling monograph upon the subject, in which I analyze one hundredand sixty separate ciphers; but I confess that this is entirely newto me. The object of those who invented the system has apparentlybeen to conceal that these characters convey a message, and to givethe idea that they are the mere random sketches of children.
"Having once recognised, however, that the symbols stood for letters,and having applied the rules which guide us in all forms of secretwritings, the solution was easy enough. The first message submittedto me was so short that it was impossible for me to do more than tosay with some confidence that the symbol
[ Picture: Picture of a single dancing man ]
stood for E. As you are aware, E is the most common letter in theEnglish alphabet, and it predominates to so marked an extent thateven in a short sentence one would expect to find it most often. Outof fifteen symbols in the first message four were the same, so it wasreasonable to set this down as E. It is true that in some cases thefigure was bearing a flag and in some cases not, but it was probablefrom the way in which the flags were distributed that they were usedto break the sentence up into words. I accepted this as a hypothesis,and noted that E was represented by
[ Picture: Picture of a single dancing man ]
"But now came the real difficulty of the inquiry. The order of theEnglish letters after E is by no means well marked, and anypreponderance which may be shown in an average of a printed sheet maybe reversed in a single short sentence. Speaking roughly, T, A, O, I,N, S, H, R, D, and L are the numerical order in which letters occur;but T, A, O, and I are very nearly abreast of each other, and itwould be an endless task to try each combination until a meaning wasarrived at. I, therefore, waited for fresh material. In my secondinterview with Mr. Hilton Cubitt he was able to give me two othershort sentences and one message, which appeared--since there was noflag--to be a single word. Here are the symbols. Now, in the singleword I have already got the two E's coming second and fourth in aword of five letters. It might be 'sever,' or 'lever,' or 'never.'There can be no question that the latter as a reply to an appeal isfar the most probable, and the circumstances pointed to its being areply written by the lady. Accepting it as correct, we are now ableto say that the symbols
[ Picture: Picture of three dancing men ]
stand respectively for N, V, and R.
"Even now I was in considerable difficulty, but a happy thought putme in possession of several other letters. It occurred to me that ifthese appeals came, as I expected, from someone who had been intimatewith the lady in her early life, a combination which contained twoE's with three letters between might very well stand for the name'ELSIE.' On examination I found that such a combination formed thetermination of the message which was three times repeated. It wascertainly some appeal to 'Elsie.' In this way I had got my L, S, andI. But what appeal could it be? There were only four letters in theword which preceded 'Elsie,' and it ended in E. Surely the word mustbe 'COME.' I tried all other four letters ending in E, but could findnone to fit the case. So now I was in possession of C, O, and M, andI was in a position to attack the first message once more, dividingit into words and putting dots for each symbol which was stillunknown. So treated it worked out in this fashion:
                         .M  .ERE  ..E  SL.NE.
"Now the first letter can only be A, which is a most usefuldiscovery, since it occurs no fewer than three times in this shortsentence, and the H is also apparent in the second word. Now itbecomes:--
                         AM  HERE  A.E  SLANE.
Or, filling in the obvious vacancies in the name:--
                        AM  HERE  ABE  SLANEY.
I had so many letters now that I could proceed with considerableconfidence to the second message, which worked out in this fashion:--
                              A. ELRI.ES.
Here I could only make sense by putting T and G for the missingletters, and supposing that the name was that of some house or inn atwhich the writer was staying."
Inspector Martin and I had listened with the utmost interest to thefull and clear account of how my friend had produced results whichhad led to so complete a command over our difficulties.
"What did you do then, sir?" asked the inspector.
"I had every reason to suppose that this Abe Slaney was an American,since Abe is an American contraction, and since a letter from Americahad been the starting-point of all the trouble. I had also everycause to think that there was some criminal secret in the matter. Thelady's allusions to her past and her refusal to take her husband intoher confidence both pointed in that direction. I therefore cabled tomy friend, Wilson Hargreave, of the New York Police Bureau, who hasmore than once made use of my knowledge of London crime. I asked himwhether the name of Abe Slaney was known to him. Here is his reply:'The most dangerous crook in Chicago.' On the very evening upon whichI had his answer Hilton Cubitt sent me the last message from Slaney.Working with known letters it took this form:--
                  ELSIE  .RE.ARE  TO  MEET  THY  GO.
The addition of a P and a D completed a message which showed me thatthe rascal was proceeding from persuasion to threats, and myknowledge of the crooks of Chicago prepared me to find that he mightvery rapidly put his words into action. I at once came to Norfolkwith my friend and colleague, Dr. Watson, but, unhappily, only intime to find that the worst had already occurred."
"It is a privilege to be associated with you in the handling of acase," said the inspector, warmly. "You will excuse me, however, if Ispeak frankly to you. You are only answerable to yourself, but I haveto answer to my superiors. If this Abe Slaney, living at Elrige's, isindeed the murderer, and if he has made his escape while I am seatedhere, I should certainly get into serious trouble."
"You need not be uneasy. He will not try to escape."
"How do you know?"
"To fly would be a confession of guilt."
"Then let us go to arrest him."
"I expect him here every instant."
"But why should he come?"
"Because I have written and asked him."
"But this is incredible, Mr. Holmes! Why should he come because youhave asked him? Would not such a request rather rouse his suspicionsand cause him to fly?"
"I think I have known how to frame the letter," said Sherlock Holmes."In fact, if I am not very much mistaken, here is the gentlemanhimself coming up the drive."
A man was striding up the path which led to the door. He was a tall,handsome, swarthy fellow, clad in a suit of grey flannel, with aPanama hat, a bristling black beard, and a great, aggressive hookednose, and flourishing a cane as he walked. He swaggered up the pathas if the place belonged to him, and we heard his loud, confidentpeal at the bell.
"I think, gentlemen," said Holmes, quietly, "that we had best take upour position behind the door. Every precaution is necessary whendealing with such a fellow. You will need your handcuffs, inspector.You can leave the talking to me."
We waited in silence for a minute--one of those minutes which one cannever forget. Then the door opened and the man stepped in. In aninstant Holmes clapped a pistol to his head and Martin slipped thehandcuffs over his wrists. It was all done so swiftly and deftly thatthe fellow was helpless before he knew that he was attacked. Heglared from one to the other of us with a pair of blazing black eyes.Then he burst into a bitter laugh.
"Well, gentlemen, you have the drop on me this time. I seem to haveknocked up against something hard. But I came here in answer to aletter from Mrs. Hilton Cubitt. Don't tell me that she is in this?Don't tell me that she helped to set a trap for me?"
"Mrs. Hilton Cubitt was seriously injured and is at death's door."
The man gave a hoarse cry of grief which rang through the house.
"You're crazy!" he cried, fiercely. "It was he that was hurt, notshe. Who would have hurt little Elsie? I may have threatened her, Godforgive me, but I would not have touched a hair of her pretty head.Take it back--you! Say that she is not hurt!"
"She was found badly wounded by the side of her dead husband."
He sank with a deep groan on to the settee and buried his face in hismanacled hands. For five minutes he was silent. Then he raised hisface once more, and spoke with the cold composure of despair.
"I have nothing to hide from you, gentlemen," said he. "If I shot theman he had his shot at me, and there's no murder in that. But if youthink I could have hurt that woman, then you don't know either me orher. I tell you there was never a man in this world loved a womanmore than I loved her. I had a right to her. She was pledged to meyears ago. Who was this Englishman that he should come between us? Itell you that I had the first right to her, and that I was onlyclaiming my own."
"She broke away from your influence when she found the man that youare," said Holmes, sternly. "She fled from America to avoid you, andshe married an honourable gentleman in England. You dogged her andfollowed her and made her life a misery to her in order to induce herto abandon the husband whom she loved and respected in order to flywith you, whom she feared and hated. You have ended by bringing aboutthe death of a noble man and driving his wife to suicide. That isyour record in this business, Mr. Abe Slaney, and you will answer forit to the law."
"If Elsie dies I care nothing what becomes of me," said the American.He opened one of his hands and looked at a note crumpled up in hispalm. "See here, mister," he cried, with a gleam of suspicion in hiseyes, "you're not trying to scare me over this, are you? If the ladyis hurt as bad as you say, who was it that wrote this note?" Hetossed it forwards on to the table.
"I wrote it to bring you here."
"You wrote it? There was no one on earth outside the Joint who knewthe secret of the dancing men. How came you to write it?"
"What one man can invent another can discover," said Holmes. "Thereis a cab coming to convey you to Norwich, Mr. Slaney. But, meanwhile,you have time to make some small reparation for the injury you havewrought. Are you aware that Mrs. Hilton Cubitt has herself lain undergrave suspicion of the murder of her husband, and that it was only mypresence here and the knowledge which I happened to possess which hassaved her from the accusation? The least that you owe her is to makeit clear to the whole world that she was in no way, directly orindirectly, responsible for his tragic end."
"I ask nothing better," said the American. "I guess the very bestcase I can make for myself is the absolute naked truth."
"It is my duty to warn you that it will be used against you," criedthe inspector, with the magnificent fair-play of the British criminallaw.
Slaney shrugged his shoulders.
"I'll chance that," said he. "First of all, I want you gentlemen tounderstand that I have known this lady since she was a child. Therewere seven of us in a gang in Chicago, and Elsie's father was theboss of the Joint. He was a clever man, was old Patrick. It was hewho invented that writing, which would pass as a child's scrawlunless you just happened to have the key to it. Well, Elsie learnedsome of our ways; but she couldn't stand the business, and she had abit of honest money of her own, so she gave us all the slip and gotaway to London. She had been engaged to me, and she would havemarried me, I believe, if I had taken over another profession; butshe would have nothing to do with anything on the cross. It was onlyafter her marriage to this Englishman that I was able to find outwhere she was. I wrote to her, but got no answer. After that I cameover, and, as letters were no use, I put my messages where she couldread them.
"Well, I have been here a month now. I lived in that farm, where Ihad a room down below, and could get in and out every night, and noone the wiser. I tried all I could to coax Elsie away. I knew thatshe read the messages, for once she wrote an answer under one ofthem. Then my temper got the better of me, and I began to threatenher. She sent me a letter then, imploring me to go away and sayingthat it would break her heart if any scandal should come upon herhusband. She said that she would come down when her husband wasasleep at three in the morning, and speak with me through the endwindow, if I would go away afterwards and leave her in peace. Shecame down and brought money with her, trying to bribe me to go. Thismade me mad, and I caught her arm and tried to pull her through thewindow. At that moment in rushed the husband with his revolver in hishand. Elsie had sunk down upon the floor, and we were face to face. Iwas heeled also, and I held up my gun to scare him off and let me getaway. He fired and missed me. I pulled off almost at the sameinstant, and down he dropped. I made away across the garden, and as Iwent I heard the window shut behind me. That's God's truth,gentlemen, every word of it, and I heard no more about it until thatlad came riding up with a note which made me walk in here, like ajay, and give myself into your hands."
A cab had driven up whilst the American had been talking. Twouniformed policemen sat inside. Inspector Martin rose and touched hisprisoner on the shoulder.
"It is time for us to go."
"Can I see her first?"
"No, she is not conscious. Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I only hope that ifever again I have an important case I shall have the good fortune tohave you by my side."
We stood at the window and watched the cab drive away. As I turnedback my eye caught the pellet of paper which the prisoner had tossedupon the table. It was the note with which Holmes had decoyed him.
"See if you can read it, Watson," said he, with a smile.
It contained no word, but this little line of dancing men:--
[ Picture: Picture of various dancing men ]
"If you use the code which I have explained," said Holmes, "you willfind that it simply means 'Come here at once.' I was convinced thatit was an invitation which he would not refuse, since he could neverimagine that it could come from anyone but the lady. And so, my dearWatson, we have ended by turning the dancing men to good when theyhave so often been the agents of evil, and I think that I havefulfilled my promise of giving you something unusual for yournote-book. Three-forty is our train, and I fancy we should be back inBaker Street for dinner."
Only one word of epilogue. The American, Abe Slaney, was condemned todeath at the winter assizes at Norwich; but his penalty was changedto penal servitude in consideration of mitigating circumstances, andthe certainty that Hilton Cubitt had fired the first shot. Of Mrs.Hilton Cubitt I only know that I have heard she recovered entirely,and that she still remains a widow, devoting her whole life to thecare of the poor and to the administration of her husband's estate.





                 THE ADVENTURE OF THE SOLITARY CYCLIST
From the years 1894 to 1901 inclusive Mr. Sherlock Holmes was a verybusy man. It is safe to say that there was no public case of anydifficulty in which he was not consulted during those eight years,and there were hundreds of private cases, some of them of the mostintricate and extraordinary character, in which he played a prominentpart. Many startling successes and a few unavoidable failures werethe outcome of this long period of continuous work. As I havepreserved very full notes of all these cases, and was myselfpersonally engaged in many of them, it may be imagined that it is noeasy task to know which I should select to lay before the public. Ishall, however, preserve my former rule, and give the preference tothose cases which derive their interest not so much from thebrutality of the crime as from the ingenuity and dramatic quality ofthe solution. For this reason I will now lay before the reader thefacts connected with Miss Violet Smith, the solitary cyclist ofCharlington, and the curious sequel of our investigation, whichculminated in unexpected tragedy. It is true that the circumstancesdid not admit of any striking illustration of those powers for whichmy friend was famous, but there were some points about the case whichmade it stand out in those long records of crime from which I gatherthe material for these little narratives.
On referring to my note-book for the year 1895 I find that it wasupon Saturday, the 23rd of April, that we first heard of Miss VioletSmith. Her visit was, I remember, extremely unwelcome to Holmes, forhe was immersed at the moment in a very abstruse and complicatedproblem concerning the peculiar persecution to which John VincentHarden, the well-known tobacco millionaire, had been subjected. Myfriend, who loved above all things precision and concentration ofthought, resented anything which distracted his attention from thematter in hand. And yet without a harshness which was foreign to hisnature it was impossible to refuse to listen to the story of theyoung and beautiful woman, tall, graceful, and queenly, who presentedherself at Baker Street late in the evening and implored hisassistance and advice. It was vain to urge that his time was alreadyfully occupied, for the young lady had come with the determination totell her story, and it was evident that nothing short of force couldget her out of the room until she had done so. With a resigned airand a somewhat weary smile, Holmes begged the beautiful intruder totake a seat and to inform us what it was that was troubling her.
"At least it cannot be your health," said he, as his keen eyes dartedover her; "so ardent a bicyclist must be full of energy."
She glanced down in surprise at her own feet, and I observed theslight roughening of the side of the sole caused by the friction ofthe edge of the pedal.
"Yes, I bicycle a good deal, Mr. Holmes, and that has something to dowith my visit to you to-day."
My friend took the lady's ungloved hand and examined it with as closean attention and as little sentiment as a scientist would show to aspecimen.
"You will excuse me, I am sure. It is my business," said he, as hedropped it. "I nearly fell into the error of supposing that you weretypewriting. Of course, it is obvious that it is music. You observethe spatulate finger-end, Watson, which is common to bothprofessions? There is a spirituality about the face, however"--hegently turned it towards the light--"which the typewriter does notgenerate. This lady is a musician."
"Yes, Mr. Holmes, I teach music."
"In the country, I presume, from your complexion."
"Yes, sir; near Farnham, on the borders of Surrey."
"A beautiful neighbourhood and full of the most interestingassociations. You remember, Watson, that it was near there that wetook Archie Stamford, the forger. Now, Miss Violet, what has happenedto you near Farnham, on the borders of Surrey?"
The young lady, with great clearness and composure, made thefollowing curious statement:--
"My father is dead, Mr. Holmes. He was James Smith, who conducted theorchestra at the old Imperial Theatre. My mother and I were leftwithout a relation in the world except one uncle, Ralph Smith, whowent to Africa twenty-five years ago, and we have never had a wordfrom him since. When father died we were left very poor, but one daywe were told that there was an advertisement in the Times inquiringfor our whereabouts. You can imagine how excited we were, for wethought that someone had left us a fortune. We went at once to thelawyer whose name was given in the paper. There we met two gentlemen,Mr. Carruthers and Mr. Woodley, who were home on a visit from SouthAfrica. They said that my uncle was a friend of theirs, that he diedsome months before in great poverty in Johannesburg, and that he hadasked them with his last breath to hunt up his relations and see thatthey were in no want. It seemed strange to us that Uncle Ralph, whotook no notice of us when he was alive, should be so careful to lookafter us when he was dead; but Mr. Carruthers explained that thereason was that my uncle had just heard of the death of his brother,and so felt responsible for our fate."
"Excuse me," said Holmes; "when was this interview?"
"Last December--four months ago."
"Pray proceed."
"Mr. Woodley seemed to me to be a most odious person. He was for evermaking eyes at me--a coarse, puffy-faced, red-moustached young man,with his hair plastered down on each side of his forehead. I thoughtthat he was perfectly hateful--and I was sure that Cyril would notwish me to know such a person."
"Oh, Cyril is his name!" said Holmes, smiling.
The young lady blushed and laughed.
"Yes, Mr. Holmes; Cyril Morton, an electrical engineer, and we hopeto be married at the end of the summer. Dear me, how did I gettalking about him? What I wished to say was that Mr. Woodley wasperfectly odious, but that Mr. Carruthers, who was a much older man,was more agreeable. He was a dark, sallow, clean-shaven, silentperson; but he had polite manners and a pleasant smile. He inquiredhow we were left, and on finding that we were very poor he suggestedthat I should come and teach music to his only daughter, aged ten. Isaid that I did not like to leave my mother, on which he suggestedthat I should go home to her every week-end, and he offered me ahundred a year, which was certainly splendid pay. So it ended by myaccepting, and I went down to Chiltern Grange, about six miles fromFarnham. Mr. Carruthers was a widower, but he had engaged alady-housekeeper, a very respectable, elderly person, called Mrs.Dixon, to look after his establishment. The child was a dear, andeverything promised well. Mr. Carruthers was very kind and verymusical, and we had most pleasant evenings together. Every week-end Iwent home to my mother in town.
"The first flaw in my happiness was the arrival of the red-moustachedMr. Woodley. He came for a visit of a week, and oh, it seemed threemonths to me! He was a dreadful person, a bully to everyone else, butto me something infinitely worse. He made odious love to me, boastedof his wealth, said that if I married him I would have the finestdiamonds in London, and finally, when I would have nothing to do withhim, he seized me in his arms one day after dinner--he was hideouslystrong--and he swore that he would not let me go until I had kissedhim. Mr. Carruthers came in and tore him off from me, on which heturned upon his own host, knocking him down and cutting his faceopen. That was the end of his visit, as you can imagine. Mr.Carruthers apologized to me next day, and assured me that I shouldnever be exposed to such an insult again. I have not seen Mr. Woodleysince.
"And now, Mr. Holmes, I come at last to the special thing which hascaused me to ask your advice to-day. You must know that everySaturday forenoon I ride on my bicycle to Farnham Station in order toget the 12.22 to town. The road from Chiltern Grange is a lonely one,and at one spot it is particularly so, for it lies for over a milebetween Charlington Heath upon one side and the woods which lie roundCharlington Hall upon the other. You could not find a more lonelytract of road anywhere, and it is quite rare to meet so much as acart, or a peasant, until you reach the high road near CrooksburyHill. Two weeks ago I was passing this place when I chanced to lookback over my shoulder, and about two hundred yards behind me I saw aman, also on a bicycle. He seemed to be a middle-aged man, with ashort, dark beard. I looked back before I reached Farnham, but theman was gone, so I thought no more about it. But you can imagine howsurprised I was, Mr. Holmes, when on my return on the Monday I sawthe same man on the same stretch of road. My astonishment wasincreased when the incident occurred again, exactly as before, on thefollowing Saturday and Monday. He always kept his distance and didnot molest me in any way, but still it certainly was very odd. Imentioned it to Mr. Carruthers, who seemed interested in what I said,and told me that he had ordered a horse and trap, so that in future Ishould not pass over these lonely roads without some companion.
"The horse and trap were to have come this week, but for some reasonthey were not delivered, and again I had to cycle to the station.That was this morning. You can think that I looked out when I came toCharlington Heath, and there, sure enough, was the man, exactly as hehad been the two weeks before. He always kept so far from me that Icould not clearly see his face, but it was certainly someone whom Idid not know. He was dressed in a dark suit with a cloth cap. Theonly thing about his face that I could clearly see was his darkbeard. To-day I was not alarmed, but I was filled with curiosity, andI determined to find out who he was and what he wanted. I slowed downmy machine, but he slowed down his. Then I stopped altogether, but hestopped also. Then I laid a trap for him. There is a sharp turning ofthe road, and I pedalled very quickly round this, and then I stoppedand waited. I expected him to shoot round and pass me before he couldstop. But he never appeared. Then I went back and looked round thecorner. I could see a mile of road, but he was not on it. To make itthe more extraordinary, there was no side road at this point downwhich he could have gone."
Holmes chuckled and rubbed his hands. "This case certainly presentssome features of its own," said he. "How much time elapsed betweenyour turning the corner and your discovery that the road was clear?"
"Two or three minutes."
"Then he could not have retreated down the road, and you say thatthere are no side roads?"
"None."
"Then he certainly took a footpath on one side or the other."
"It could not have been on the side of the heath or I should haveseen him."
"So by the process of exclusion we arrive at the fact that he madehis way towards Charlington Hall, which, as I understand, is situatedin its own grounds on one side of the road. Anything else?"
"Nothing, Mr. Holmes, save that I was so perplexed that I felt Ishould not be happy until I had seen you and had your advice."
Holmes sat in silence for some little time.
"Where is the gentleman to whom you are engaged?" he asked, at last.
"He is in the Midland Electrical Company, at Coventry."
"He would not pay you a surprise visit?"
"Oh, Mr. Holmes! As if I should not know him!"
"Have you had any other admirers?"
"Several before I knew Cyril."
"And since?"
"There was this dreadful man, Woodley, if you can call him anadmirer."
"No one else?"
Our fair client seemed a little confused.
"Who was he?" asked Holmes.
"Oh, it may be a mere fancy of mine; but it has seemed to mesometimes that my employer, Mr. Carruthers, takes a great deal ofinterest in me. We are thrown rather together. I play hisaccompaniments in the evening. He has never said anything. He is aperfect gentleman. But a girl always knows."
"Ha!" Holmes looked grave. "What does he do for a living?"
"He is a rich man."
"No carriages or horses?"
"Well, at least he is fairly well-to-do. But he goes into the Citytwo or three times a week. He is deeply interested in South Africangold shares."
"You will let me know any fresh development, Miss Smith. I am verybusy just now, but I will find time to make some inquiries into yourcase. In the meantime take no step without letting me know. Good-bye,and I trust that we shall have nothing but good news from you."
"It is part of the settled order of Nature that such a girl shouldhave followers," said Holmes, as he pulled at his meditative pipe,"but for choice not on bicycles in lonely country roads. Somesecretive lover, beyond all doubt. But there are curious andsuggestive details about the case, Watson."
"That he should appear only at that point?"
"Exactly. Our first effort must be to find who are the tenants ofCharlington Hall. Then, again, how about the connection betweenCarruthers and Woodley, since they appear to be men of such adifferent type? How came they both to be so keen upon looking upRalph Smith's relations? One more point. What sort of a menage is itwhich pays double the market price for a governess, but does not keepa horse although six miles from the station? Odd, Watson--very odd!"
"You will go down?"
"No, my dear fellow, you will go down. This may be some triflingintrigue, and I cannot break my other important research for the sakeof it. On Monday you will arrive early at Farnham; you will concealyourself near Charlington Heath; you will observe these facts foryourself, and act as your own judgment advises. Then, having inquiredas to the occupants of the Hall, you will come back to me and report.And now, Watson, not another word of the matter until we have a fewsolid stepping-stones on which we may hope to get across to oursolution."
We had ascertained from the lady that she went down upon the Mondayby the train which leaves Waterloo at 9.50, so I started early andcaught the 9.13. At Farnham Station I had no difficulty in beingdirected to Charlington Heath. It was impossible to mistake the sceneof the young lady's adventure, for the road runs between the openheath on one side and an old yew hedge upon the other, surrounding apark which is studded with magnificent trees. There was a maingateway of lichen-studded stone, each side pillar surmounted bymouldering heraldic emblems; but besides this central carriage driveI observed several points where there were gaps in the hedge andpaths leading through them. The house was invisible from the road,but the surroundings all spoke of gloom and decay.
The heath was covered with golden patches of flowering gorse,gleaming magnificently in the light of the bright spring sunshine.Behind one of these clumps I took up my position, so as to commandboth the gateway of the Hall and a long stretch of the road uponeither side. It had been deserted when I left it, but now I saw acyclist riding down it from the opposite direction to that in which Ihad come. He was clad in a dark suit, and I saw that he had a blackbeard. On reaching the end of the Charlington grounds he sprang fromhis machine and led it through a gap in the hedge, disappearing frommy view.
A quarter of an hour passed and then a second cyclist appeared. Thistime it was the young lady coming from the station. I saw her lookabout her as she came to the Charlington hedge. An instant later theman emerged from his hiding-place, sprang upon his cycle, andfollowed her. In all the broad landscape those were the only movingfigures, the graceful girl sitting very straight upon her machine,and the man behind her bending low over his handle-bar, with acuriously furtive suggestion in every movement. She looked back athim and slowed her pace. He slowed also. She stopped. He at oncestopped too, keeping two hundred yards behind her. Her next movementwas as unexpected as it was spirited. She suddenly whisked her wheelsround and dashed straight at him! He was as quick as she, however,and darted off in desperate flight. Presently she came back up theroad again, her head haughtily in the air, not deigning to take anyfurther notice of her silent attendant. He had turned also, and stillkept his distance until the curve of the road hid them from my sight.
I remained in my hiding-place, and it was well that I did so, forpresently the man reappeared cycling slowly back. He turned in at theHall gates and dismounted from his machine. For some few minutes Icould see him standing among the trees. His hands were raised and heseemed to be settling his necktie. Then he mounted his cycle and rodeaway from me down the drive towards the Hall. I ran across the heathand peered through the trees. Far away I could catch glimpses of theold grey building with its bristling Tudor chimneys, but the driveran through a dense shrubbery, and I saw no more of my man.
However, it seemed to me that I had done a fairly good morning'swork, and I walked back in high spirits to Farnham. The localhouse-agent could tell me nothing about Charlington Hall, andreferred me to a well-known firm in Pall Mall. There I halted on myway home, and met with courtesy from the representative. No, I couldnot have Charlington Hall for the summer. I was just too late. It hadbeen let about a month ago. Mr. Williamson was the name of thetenant. He was a respectable elderly gentleman. The polite agent wasafraid he could say no more, as the affairs of his clients were notmatters which he could discuss.
Mr. Sherlock Holmes listened with attention to the long report whichI was able to present to him that evening, but it did not elicit thatword of curt praise which I had hoped for and should have valued. Onthe contrary, his austere face was even more severe than usual as hecommented upon the things that I had done and the things that I hadnot.
"Your hiding-place, my dear Watson, was very faulty. You should havebeen behind the hedge; then you would have had a close view of thisinteresting person. As it is you were some hundreds of yards away,and can tell me even less than Miss Smith. She thinks she does notknow the man; I am convinced she does. Why, otherwise, should he beso desperately anxious that she should not get so near him as to seehis features? You describe him as bending over the handle-bar.Concealment again, you see. You really have done remarkably badly. Hereturns to the house and you want to find out who he is. You come toa London house-agent!"
"What should I have done?" I cried, with some heat.
"Gone to the nearest public-house. That is the centre of countrygossip. They would have told you every name, from the master to thescullery-maid. Williamson! It conveys nothing to my mind. If he is anelderly man he is not this active cyclist who sprints away from thatathletic young lady's pursuit. What have we gained by yourexpedition? The knowledge that the girl's story is true. I neverdoubted it. That there is a connection between the cyclist and theHall. I never doubted that either. That the Hall is tenanted byWilliamson. Who's the better for that? Well, well, my dear sir, don'tlook so depressed. We can do little more until next Saturday, and inthe meantime I may make one or two inquiries myself."
Next morning we had a note from Miss Smith, recounting shortly andaccurately the very incidents which I had seen, but the pith of theletter lay in the postscript:
"I am sure that you will respect my confidence, Mr. Holmes, when Itell you that my place here has become difficult owing to the factthat my employer has proposed marriage to me. I am convinced that hisfeelings are most deep and most honourable. At the same time mypromise is, of course, given. He took my refusal very seriously, butalso very gently. You can understand, however, that the situation isa little strained."
"Our young friend seems to be getting into deep waters," said Holmes,thoughtfully, as he finished the letter. "The case certainly presentsmore features of interest and more possibility of development than Ihad originally thought. I should be none the worse for a quiet,peaceful day in the country, and I am inclined to run down thisafternoon and test one or two theories which I have formed."
Holmes's quiet day in the country had a singular termination, for hearrived at Baker Street late in the evening with a cut lip and adiscoloured lump upon his forehead, besides a general air ofdissipation which would have made his own person the fitting objectof a Scotland Yard investigation. He was immensely tickled by his ownadventures, and laughed heartily as he recounted them.
"I get so little active exercise that it is always a treat," said he."You are aware that I have some proficiency in the good old Britishsport of boxing. Occasionally it is of service. To-day, for example,I should have come to very ignominious grief without it."
I begged him to tell me what had occurred.
"I found that country pub which I had already recommended to yournotice, and there I made my discreet inquiries. I was in the bar, anda garrulous landlord was giving me all that I wanted. Williamson is awhite-bearded man, and he lives alone with a small staff of servantsat the Hall. There is some rumour that he is or has been a clergyman;but one or two incidents of his short residence at the Hall struck meas peculiarly unecclesiastical. I have already made some inquiries ata clerical agency, and they tell me that there was a man of that namein orders whose career has been a singularly dark one. The landlordfurther informed me that there are usually week-end visitors--'a warmlot, sir'--at the Hall, and especially one gentleman with a redmoustache, Mr. Woodley by name, who was always there. We had got asfar as this when who should walk in but the gentleman himself, whohad been drinking his beer in the tap-room and had heard the wholeconversation. Who was I? What did I want? What did I mean by askingquestions? He had a fine flow of language, and his adjectives werevery vigorous. He ended a string of abuse by a vicious back-handerwhich I failed to entirely avoid. The next few minutes weredelicious. It was a straight left against a slogging ruffian. Iemerged as you see me. Mr. Woodley went home in a cart. So ended mycountry trip, and it must be confessed that, however enjoyable, myday on the Surrey border has not been much more profitable than yourown."
The Thursday brought us another letter from our client.
You will not be surprised, Mr. Holmes [said she] to hear that I amleaving Mr. Carruthers's employment. Even the high pay cannotreconcile me to the discomforts of my situation. On Saturday I comeup to town and I do not intend to return. Mr. Carruthers has got atrap, and so the dangers of the lonely road, if there ever were anydangers, are now over.As to the special cause of my leaving, it is not merely the strainedsituation with Mr. Carruthers, but it is the reappearance of thatodious man, Mr. Woodley. He was always hideous, but he looks moreawful than ever now, for he appears to have had an accident and he ismuch disfigured. I saw him out of the window, but I am glad to say Idid not meet him. He had a long talk with Mr. Carruthers, who seemedmuch excited afterwards. Woodley must be staying in theneighbourhood, for he did not sleep here, and yet I caught a glimpseof him again this morning slinking about in the shrubbery. I wouldsooner have a savage wild animal loose about the place. I loathe andfear him more than I can say. How can Mr. Carruthers endure such acreature for a moment? However, all my troubles will be over onSaturday.
"So I trust, Watson; so I trust," said Holmes, gravely. "There issome deep intrigue going on round that little woman, and it is ourduty to see that no one molests her upon that last journey. I think,Watson, that we must spare time to run down together on Saturdaymorning, and make sure that this curious and inconclusiveinvestigation has no untoward ending."
I confess that I had not up to now taken a very serious view of thecase, which had seemed to me rather grotesque and bizarre thandangerous. That a man should lie in wait for and follow a veryhandsome woman is no unheard-of thing, and if he had so littleaudacity that he not only dared not address her, but even fled fromher approach, he was not a very formidable assailant. The ruffianWoodley was a very different person, but, except on one occasion, hehad not molested our client, and now he visited the house ofCarruthers without intruding upon her presence. The man on thebicycle was doubtless a member of those week-end parties at the Hallof which the publican had spoken; but who he was or what he wantedwas as obscure as ever. It was the severity of Holmes's manner andthe fact that he slipped a revolver into his pocket before leavingour rooms which impressed me with the feeling that tragedy mightprove to lurk behind this curious train of events.
A rainy night had been followed by a glorious morning, and theheath-covered country-side with the glowing clumps of flowering gorseseemed all the more beautiful to eyes which were weary of the dunsand drabs and slate-greys of London. Holmes and I walked along thebroad, sandy road inhaling the fresh morning air, and rejoicing inthe music of the birds and the fresh breath of the spring. From arise of the road on the shoulder of Crooksbury Hill we could see thegrim Hall bristling out from amidst the ancient oaks, which, old asthey were, were still younger than the building which theysurrounded. Holmes pointed down the long tract of road which wound, areddish yellow band, between the brown of the heath and the buddinggreen of the woods. Far away, a black dot, we could see a vehiclemoving in our direction. Holmes gave an exclamation of impatience.
"I had given a margin of half an hour," said he. "If that is her trapshe must be making for the earlier train. I fear, Watson, that shewill be past Charlington before we can possibly meet her."
From the instant that we passed the rise we could no longer see thevehicle, but we hastened onwards at such a pace that my sedentarylife began to tell upon me, and I was compelled to fall behind.Holmes, however, was always in training, for he had inexhaustiblestores of nervous energy upon which to draw. His springy step neverslowed until suddenly, when he was a hundred yards in front of me, hehalted, and I saw him throw up his hand with a gesture of grief anddespair. At the same instant an empty dog-cart, the horse cantering,the reins trailing, appeared round the curve of the road and rattledswiftly towards us.
"Too late, Watson; too late!" cried Holmes, as I ran panting to hisside. "Fool that I was not to allow for that earlier train! It'sabduction, Watson--abduction! Murder! Heaven knows what! Block theroad! Stop the horse! That's right. Now, jump in, and let us see if Ican repair the consequences of my own blunder."
We had sprung into the dog-cart, and Holmes, after turning the horse,gave it a sharp cut with the whip, and we flew back along the road.As we turned the curve the whole stretch of road between the Hall andthe heath was opened up. I grasped Holmes's arm.
"That's the man!" I gasped.
A solitary cyclist was coming towards us. His head was down and hisshoulders rounded as he put every ounce of energy that he possessedon to the pedals. He was flying like a racer. Suddenly he raised hisbearded face, saw us close to him, and pulled up, springing from hismachine. That coal-black beard was in singular contrast to the pallorof his face, and his eyes were as bright as if he had a fever. Hestared at us and at the dog-cart. Then a look of amazement came overhis face.
"Halloa! Stop there!" he shouted, holding his bicycle to block ourroad. "Where did you get that dog-cart? Pull up, man!" he yelled,drawing a pistol from his side pocket. "Pull up, I say, or, byGeorge, I'll put a bullet into your horse."
Holmes threw the reins into my lap and sprang down from the cart.
"You're the man we want to see. Where is Miss Violet Smith?" he said,in his quick, clear way.
"That's what I am asking you. You're in her dog-cart. You ought toknow where she is."
"We met the dog-cart on the road. There was no one in it. We droveback to help the young lady."
"Good Lord! Good Lord! what shall I do?" cried the stranger, in anecstasy of despair. "They've got her, that hellhound Woodley and theblackguard parson. Come, man, come, if you really are her friend.Stand by me and we'll save her, if I have to leave my carcass inCharlington Wood."
He ran distractedly, his pistol in his hand, towards a gap in thehedge. Holmes followed him, and I, leaving the horse grazing besidethe road, followed Holmes.
"This is where they came through," said he, pointing to the marks ofseveral feet upon the muddy path. "Halloa! Stop a minute! Who's thisin the bush?"
It was a young fellow about seventeen, dressed like an ostler, withleather cords and gaiters. He lay upon his back, his knees drawn up,a terrible cut upon his head. He was insensible, but alive. A glanceat his wound told me that it had not penetrated the bone.
"That's Peter, the groom," cried the stranger. "He drove her. Thebeasts have pulled him off and clubbed him. Let him lie; we can't dohim any good, but we may save her from the worst fate that can befalla woman."
We ran frantically down the path, which wound among the trees. We hadreached the shrubbery which surrounded the house when Holmes pulledup.
"They didn't go to the house. Here are their marks on the left--here,beside the laurel bushes! Ah, I said so!"
As he spoke a woman's shrill scream--a scream which vibrated with afrenzy of horror--burst from the thick green clump of bushes in frontof us. It ended suddenly on its highest note with a choke and agurgle.
"This way! This way! They are in the bowling alley," cried thestranger, darting through the bushes. "Ah, the cowardly dogs! Followme, gentlemen! Too late! too late! by the living Jingo!"
We had broken suddenly into a lovely glade of greensward surroundedby ancient trees. On the farther side of it, under the shadow of amighty oak, there stood a singular group of three people. One was awoman, our client, drooping and faint, a handkerchief round hermouth. Opposite her stood a brutal, heavy-faced, red-moustached youngman, his gaitered legs parted wide, one arm akimbo, the other wavinga riding-crop, his whole attitude suggestive of triumphant bravado.Between them an elderly, grey-bearded man, wearing a short surpliceover a light tweed suit, had evidently just completed the weddingservice, for he pocketed his prayer-book as we appeared and slappedthe sinister bridegroom upon the back in jovial congratulation.
"They're married!" I gasped.
"Come on!" cried our guide; "come on!" He rushed across the glade,Holmes and I at his heels. As we approached, the lady staggeredagainst the trunk of the tree for support. Williamson, theex-clergyman, bowed to us with mock politeness, and the bully Woodleyadvanced with a shout of brutal and exultant laughter.
"You can take your beard off, Bob," said he. "I know you rightenough. Well, you and your pals have just come in time for me to beable to introduce you to Mrs. Woodley."
Our guide's answer was a singular one. He snatched off the dark beardwhich had disguised him and threw it on the ground, disclosing along, sallow, clean-shaven face below it. Then he raised his revolverand covered the young ruffian, who was advancing upon him with hisdangerous riding-crop swinging in his hand.
"Yes," said our ally, "I am Bob Carruthers, and I'll see this womanrighted if I have to swing for it. I told you what I'd do if youmolested her, and, by the Lord, I'll be as good as my word!"
"You're too late. She's my wife!"
"No, she's your widow."
His revolver cracked, and I saw the blood spurt from the front ofWoodley's waistcoat. He spun round with a scream and fell upon hisback, his hideous red face turning suddenly to a dreadful mottledpallor. The old man, still clad in his surplice, burst into such astring of foul oaths as I have never heard, and pulled out a revolverof his own, but before he could raise it he was looking down thebarrel of Holmes's weapon.
"Enough of this," said my friend, coldly. "Drop that pistol! Watson,pick it up! Hold it to his head! Thank you. You, Carruthers, give methat revolver. We'll have no more violence. Come, hand it over!"
"Who are you, then?"
"My name is Sherlock Holmes."
"Good Lord!"
"You have heard of me, I see. I will represent the official policeuntil their arrival. Here, you!" he shouted to a frightened groom whohad appeared at the edge of the glade. "Come here. Take this note ashard as you can ride to Farnham." He scribbled a few words upon aleaf from his note-book. "Give it to the superintendent at thepolice-station. Until he comes I must detain you all under mypersonal custody."
The strong, masterful personality of Holmes dominated the tragicscene, and all were equally puppets in his hands. Williamson andCarruthers found themselves carrying the wounded Woodley into thehouse, and I gave my arm to the frightened girl. The injured man waslaid on his bed, and at Holmes's request I examined him. I carried myreport to where he sat in the old tapestry-hung dining-room with histwo prisoners before him.
"He will live," said I.
"What!" cried Carruthers, springing out of his chair. "I'll goupstairs and finish him first. Do you tell me that that girl, thatangel, is to be tied to Roaring Jack Woodley for life?"
"You need not concern yourself about that," said Holmes. "There aretwo very good reasons why she should under no circumstances be hiswife. In the first place, we are very safe in questioning Mr.Williamson's right to solemnize a marriage."
"I have been ordained," cried the old rascal.
"And also unfrocked."
"Once a clergyman, always a clergyman."
"I think not. How about the license?"
"We had a license for the marriage. I have it here in my pocket."
"Then you got it by a trick. But in any case a forced marriage is nomarriage, but it is a very serious felony, as you will discoverbefore you have finished. You'll have time to think the point outduring the next ten years or so, unless I am mistaken. As to you,Carruthers, you would have done better to keep your pistol in yourpocket."
"I begin to think so, Mr. Holmes; but when I thought of all theprecaution I had taken to shield this girl--for I loved her, Mr.Holmes, and it is the only time that ever I knew what love was--itfairly drove me mad to think that she was in the power of thegreatest brute and bully in South Africa, a man whose name is a holyterror from Kimberley to Johannesburg. Why, Mr. Holmes, you'll hardlybelieve it, but ever since that girl has been in my employment Inever once let her go past this house, where I knew these rascalswere lurking, without following her on my bicycle just to see thatshe came to no harm. I kept my distance from her, and I wore a beardso that she should not recognise me, for she is a good andhigh-spirited girl, and she wouldn't have stayed in my employmentlong if she had thought that I was following her about the countryroads."
"Why didn't you tell her of her danger?"
"Because then, again, she would have left me, and I couldn't bear toface that. Even if she couldn't love me it was a great deal to mejust to see her dainty form about the house, and to hear the sound ofher voice."
"Well," said I, "you call that love, Mr. Carruthers, but I shouldcall it selfishness."
"Maybe the two things go together. Anyhow, I couldn't let her go.Besides, with this crowd about, it was well that she should havesomeone near to look after her. Then when the cable came I knew theywere bound to make a move."
"What cable?"
Carruthers took a telegram from his pocket.
"That's it," said he.
It was short and concise:
The old man is dead."Hum!" said Holmes. "I think I see how things worked, and I canunderstand how this message would, as you say, bring them to a head.But while we wait you might tell me what you can."
The old reprobate with the surplice burst into a volley of badlanguage.
"By Heaven," said he, "if you squeal on us, Bob Carruthers, I'llserve you as you served Jack Woodley. You can bleat about the girl toyour heart's content, for that's your own affair, but if you round onyour pals to this plain-clothes copper it will be the worst day'swork that ever you did."
"Your reverence need not be excited," said Holmes, lighting acigarette. "The case is clear enough against you, and all I ask is afew details for my private curiosity. However, if there's anydifficulty in your telling me I'll do the talking, and then you willsee how far you have a chance of holding back your secrets. In thefirst place, three of you came from South Africa on this game--youWilliamson, you Carruthers, and Woodley."
"Lie number one," said the old man; "I never saw either of them untiltwo months ago, and I have never been in Africa in my life, so youcan put that in your pipe and smoke it, Mr. Busybody Holmes!"
"What he says is true," said Carruthers.
"Well, well, two of you came over. His reverence is our own home-madearticle. You had known Ralph Smith in South Africa. You had reason tobelieve he would not live long. You found out that his niece wouldinherit his fortune. How's that--eh?"
Carruthers nodded and Williamson swore.
"She was next-of-kin, no doubt, and you were aware that the oldfellow would make no will."
"Couldn't read or write," said Carruthers.
"So you came over, the two of you, and hunted up the girl. The ideawas that one of you was to marry her and the other have a share ofthe plunder. For some reason Woodley was chosen as the husband. Whywas that?"
"We played cards for her on the voyage. He won."
"I see. You got the young lady into your service, and there Woodleywas to do the courting. She recognised the drunken brute that he was,and would have nothing to do with him. Meanwhile, your arrangementwas rather upset by the fact that you had yourself fallen in lovewith the lady. You could no longer bear the idea of this ruffianowning her."
"No, by George, I couldn't!"
"There was a quarrel between you. He left you in a rage, and began tomake his own plans independently of you."
"It strikes me, Williamson, there isn't very much that we can tellthis gentleman," cried Carruthers, with a bitter laugh. "Yes, wequarreled, and he knocked me down. I am level with him on that,anyhow. Then I lost sight of him. That was when he picked up withthis cast padre here. I found that they had set up house-keepingtogether at this place on the line that she had to pass for thestation. I kept my eye on her after that, for I knew there was somedevilry in the wind. I saw them from time to time, for I was anxiousto know what they were after. Two days ago Woodley came up to myhouse with this cable, which showed that Ralph Smith was dead. Heasked me if I would stand by the bargain. I said I would not. Heasked me if I would marry the girl myself and give him a share. Isaid I would willingly do so, but that she would not have me. Hesaid, 'Let us get her married first, and after a week or two she maysee things a bit different.' I said I would have nothing to do withviolence. So he went off cursing, like the foul-mouthed blackguardthat he was, and swearing that he would have her yet. She was leavingme this week-end, and I had got a trap to take her to the station,but I was so uneasy in my mind that I followed her on my bicycle. Shehad got a start, however, and before I could catch her the mischiefwas done. The first thing I knew about it was when I saw you twogentlemen driving back in her dog-cart."
Holmes rose and tossed the end of his cigarette into the grate. "Ihave been very obtuse, Watson," said he. "When in your report yousaid that you had seen the cyclist as you thought arrange his necktiein the shrubbery, that alone should have told me all. However, we maycongratulate ourselves upon a curious and in some respects a uniquecase. I perceive three of the county constabulary in the drive, and Iam glad to see that the little ostler is able to keep pace with them;so it is likely that neither he nor the interesting bridegroom willbe permanently damaged by their morning's adventures. I think,Watson, that in your medical capacity you might wait upon Miss Smithand tell her that if she is sufficiently recovered we shall be happyto escort her to her mother's home. If she is not quite convalescentyou will find that a hint that we were about to telegraph to a youngelectrician in the Midlands would probably complete the cure. As toyou, Mr. Carruthers, I think that you have done what you could tomake amends for your share in an evil plot. There is my card, sir,and if my evidence can be of help to you in your trial it shall be atyour disposal."
In the whirl of our incessant activity it has often been difficultfor me, as the reader has probably observed, to round off mynarratives, and to give those final details which the curious mightexpect. Each case has been the prelude to another, and the crisisonce over the actors have passed for ever out of our busy lives. Ifind, however, a short note at the end of my manuscripts dealing withthis case, in which I have put it upon record that Miss Violet Smithdid indeed inherit a large fortune, and that she is now the wife ofCyril Morton, the senior partner of Morton & Kennedy, the famousWestminster electricians. Williamson and Woodley were both tried forabduction and assault, the former getting seven years and the latterten. Of the fate of Carruthers I have no record, but I am sure thathis assault was not viewed very gravely by the Court, since Woodleyhad the reputation of being a most dangerous ruffian, and I thinkthat a few months were sufficient to satisfy the demands of justice.





                  THE ADVENTURE OF THE PRIORY SCHOOL
We have had some dramatic entrances and exits upon our small stage atBaker Street, but I cannot recollect anything more sudden andstartling than the first appearance of Thorneycroft Huxtable, M.A.,Ph.D., etc. His card, which seemed too small to carry the weight ofhis academic distinctions, preceded him by a few seconds, and then heentered himself--so large, so pompous, and so dignified that he wasthe very embodiment of self-possession and solidity. And yet hisfirst action when the door had closed behind him was to staggeragainst the table, whence he slipped down upon the floor, and therewas that majestic figure prostrate and insensible upon our bearskinhearthrug.
We had sprung to our feet, and for a few moments we stared in silentamazement at this ponderous piece of wreckage, which told of somesudden and fatal storm far out on the ocean of life. Then Holmeshurried with a cushion for his head and I with brandy for his lips.The heavy white face was seamed with lines of trouble, the hangingpouches under the closed eyes were leaden in colour, the loose mouthdrooped dolorously at the corners, the rolling chins were unshaven.Collar and shirt bore the grime of a long journey, and the hairbristled unkempt from the well-shaped head. It was a sorely-strickenman who lay before us.
"What is it, Watson?" asked Holmes.
"Absolute exhaustion--possibly mere hunger and fatigue," said I, withmy finger on the thready pulse, where the stream of life trickledthin and small.
"Return ticket from Mackleton, in the North of England," said Holmes,drawing it from the watch-pocket. "It is not twelve o'clock yet. Hehas certainly been an early starter."
The puckered eyelids had begun to quiver, and now a pair of vacant,grey eyes looked up at us. An instant later the man had scrambled onto his feet, his face crimson with shame.
"Forgive this weakness, Mr. Holmes; I have been a little overwrought.Thank you, if I might have a glass of milk and a biscuit I have nodoubt that I should be better. I came personally, Mr. Holmes, inorder to ensure that you would return with me. I feared that notelegram would convince you of the absolute urgency of the case."
"When you are quite restored--
"I am quite well again. I cannot imagine how I came to be so weak. Iwish you, Mr. Holmes, to come to Mackleton with me by the nexttrain."
My friend shook his head.
"My colleague, Dr. Watson, could tell you that we are very busy atpresent. I am retained in this case of the Ferrers Documents, and theAbergavenny murder is coming up for trial. Only a very importantissue could call me from London at present."
"Important!" Our visitor threw up his hands. "Have you heard nothingof the abduction of the only son of the Duke of Holdernesse?"
"What! the late Cabinet Minister?"
"Exactly. We had tried to keep it out of the papers, but there wassome rumour in the Globe last night. I thought it might have reachedyour ears."
Holmes shot out his long, thin arm and picked out Volume "H" in hisencyclopaedia of reference.
"'Holdernesse, 6th Duke, K.G., P.C.'--half the alphabet! 'BaronBeverley, Earl of Carston'--dear me, what a list! 'Lord Lieutenant ofHallamshire since 1900. Married Edith, daughter of Sir CharlesAppledore, 1888. Heir and only child, Lord Saltire. Owns about twohundred and fifty thousand acres. Minerals in Lancashire and Wales.Address: Carlton House Terrace; Holdernesse Hall, Hallamshire;Carston Castle, Bangor, Wales. Lord of the Admiralty, 1872; ChiefSecretary of State for--' Well, well, this man is certainly one ofthe greatest subjects of the Crown!"
"The greatest and perhaps the wealthiest. I am aware, Mr. Holmes,that you take a very high line in professional matters, and that youare prepared to work for the work's sake. I may tell you, however,that his Grace has already intimated that a cheque for five thousandpounds will be handed over to the person who can tell him where hisson is, and another thousand to him who can name the man, or men, whohave taken him."
"It is a princely offer," said Holmes. "Watson, I think that we shallaccompany Dr. Huxtable back to the North of England. And now, Dr.Huxtable, when you have consumed that milk you will kindly tell mewhat has happened, when it happened, how it happened, and, finally,what Dr. Thorneycroft Huxtable, of the Priory School, near Mackleton,has to do with the matter, and why he comes three days after anevent--the state of your chin gives the date--to ask for my humbleservices."
Our visitor had consumed his milk and biscuits. The light had comeback to his eyes and the colour to his cheeks as he set himself withgreat vigour and lucidity to explain the situation.
"I must inform you, gentlemen, that the Priory is a preparatoryschool, of which I am the founder and principal. 'Huxtable'sSidelights on Horace' may possibly recall my name to your memories.The Priory is, without exception, the best and most selectpreparatory school in England. Lord Leverstoke, the Earl ofBlackwater, Sir Cathcart Soames--they all have entrusted their sonsto me. But I felt that my school had reached its zenith when, threeweeks ago, the Duke of Holdernesse sent Mr. James Wilder, hissecretary, with the intimation that young Lord Saltire, ten yearsold, his only son and heir, was about to be committed to my charge.Little did I think that this would be the prelude to the mostcrushing misfortune of my life.
"On May 1st the boy arrived, that being the beginning of the summerterm. He was a charming youth, and he soon fell into our ways. I maytell you--I trust that I am not indiscreet, but half-confidences areabsurd in such a case--that he was not entirely happy at home. It isan open secret that the Duke's married life had not been a peacefulone, and the matter had ended in a separation by mutual consent, theDuchess taking up her residence in the South of France. This hadoccurred very shortly before, and the boy's sympathies are known tohave been strongly with his mother. He moped after her departure fromHoldernesse Hall, and it was for this reason that the Duke desired tosend him to my establishment. In a fortnight the boy was quite athome with us, and was apparently absolutely happy.
"He was last seen on the night of May 13th--that is, the night oflast Monday. His room was on the second floor, and was approachedthrough another larger room in which two boys were sleeping. Theseboys saw and heard nothing, so that it is certain that young Saltiredid not pass out that way. His window was open, and there is a stoutivy plant leading to the ground. We could trace no footmarks below,but it is sure that this is the only possible exit.
"His absence was discovered at seven o'clock on Tuesday morning. Hisbed had been slept in. He had dressed himself fully before going offin his usual school suit of black Eton jacket and dark grey trousers.There were no signs that anyone had entered the room, and it is quitecertain that anything in the nature of cries, or a struggle, wouldhave been heard, since Caunter, the elder boy in the inner room, is avery light sleeper.
"When Lord Saltire's disappearance was discovered I at once called aroll of the whole establishment, boys, masters, and servants. It wasthen that we ascertained that Lord Saltire had not been alone in hisflight. Heidegger, the German master, was missing. His room was onthe second floor, at the farther end of the building, facing the sameway as Lord Saltire's. His bed had also been slept in; but he hadapparently gone away partly dressed, since his shirt and socks werelying on the floor. He had undoubtedly let himself down by the ivy,for we could see the marks of his feet where he had landed on thelawn. His bicycle was kept in a small shed beside this lawn, and italso was gone.
"He had been with me for two years, and came with the bestreferences; but he was a silent, morose man, not very popular eitherwith masters or boys. No trace could be found of the fugitives, andnow on Thursday morning we are as ignorant as we were on Tuesday.Inquiry was, of course, made at once at Holdernesse Hall. It is onlya few miles away, and we imagined that in some sudden attack ofhome-sickness he had gone back to his father; but nothing had beenheard of him. The Duke is greatly agitated--and as to me, you haveseen yourselves the state of nervous prostration to which thesuspense and the responsibility have reduced me. Mr. Holmes, if everyou put forward your full powers, I implore you to do so now, fornever in your life could you have a case which is more worthy ofthem."
Sherlock Holmes had listened with the utmost intentness to thestatement of the unhappy schoolmaster. His drawn brows and the deepfurrow between them showed that he needed no exhortation toconcentrate all his attention upon a problem which, apart from thetremendous interests involved, must appeal so directly to his love ofthe complex and the unusual. He now drew out his note-book and jotteddown one or two memoranda.
"You have been very remiss in not coming to me sooner," said he,severely. "You start me on my investigation with a very serioushandicap. It is inconceivable, for example, that this ivy and thislawn would have yielded nothing to an expert observer."
"I am not to blame, Mr. Holmes. His Grace was extremely desirous toavoid all public scandal. He was afraid of his family unhappinessbeing dragged before the world. He has a deep horror of anything ofthe kind."
"But there has been some official investigation?"
"Yes, sir, and it has proved most disappointing. An apparent clue wasat once obtained, since a boy and a young man were reported to havebeen seen leaving a neighbouring station by an early train. Only lastnight we had news that the couple had been hunted down in Liverpool,and they prove to have no connection whatever with the matter inhand. Then it was that in my despair and disappointment, after asleepless night, I came straight to you by the early train."
"I suppose the local investigation was relaxed while this false cluewas being followed up?"
"It was entirely dropped."
"So that three days have been wasted. The affair has been mostdeplorably handled."
"I feel it, and admit it."
"And yet the problem should be capable of ultimate solution. I shallbe very happy to look into it. Have you been able to trace anyconnection between the missing boy and this German master?"
"None at all."
"Was he in the master's class?"
"No; he never exchanged a word with him so far as I know."
"That is certainly very singular. Had the boy a bicycle?"
"No."
"Was any other bicycle missing?"
"No."
"Is that certain?"
"Quite."
"Well, now, you do not mean to seriously suggest that this Germanrode off upon a bicycle in the dead of the night bearing the boy inhis arms?"
"Certainly not."
"Then what is the theory in your mind?"
"The bicycle may have been a blind. It may have been hidden somewhereand the pair gone off on foot."
"Quite so; but it seems rather an absurd blind, does it not? Werethere other bicycles in this shed?"
"Several."
"Would he not have hidden a couple he desired to give the idea thatthey had gone off upon them?"
"I suppose he would."
"Of course he would. The blind theory won't do. But the incident isan admirable starting-point for an investigation. After all, abicycle is not an easy thing to conceal or to destroy. One otherquestion. Did anyone call to see the boy on the day before hedisappeared?"
"No."
"Did he get any letters?"
"Yes; one letter."
"From whom?"
"From his father."
"Do you open the boys' letters?"
"No."
"How do you know it was from the father?"
"The coat of arms was on the envelope, and it was addressed in theDuke's peculiar stiff hand. Besides, the Duke remembers havingwritten."
"When had he a letter before that?"
"Not for several days."
"Had he ever one from France?"
"No; never."
"You see the point of my questions, of course. Either the boy wascarried off by force or he went of his own free will. In the lattercase you would expect that some prompting from outside would beneeded to make so young a lad do such a thing. If he has had novisitors, that prompting must have come in letters. Hence I try tofind out who were his correspondents."
"I fear I cannot help you much. His only correspondent, so far as Iknow, was his own father."
"Who wrote to him on the very day of his disappearance. Were therelations between father and son very friendly?"
"His Grace is never very friendly with anyone. He is completelyimmersed in large public questions, and is rather inaccessible to allordinary emotions. But he was always kind to the boy in his own way."
"But the sympathies of the latter were with the mother?"
"Yes."
"Did he say so?"
"No."
"The Duke, then?"
"Good heavens, no!"
"Then how could you know?"
"I have had some confidential talks with Mr. James Wilder, hisGrace's secretary. It was he who gave me the information about LordSaltire's feelings."
"I see. By the way, that last letter of the Duke's--was it found inthe boy's room after he was gone?"
"No; he had taken it with him. I think, Mr. Holmes, it is time thatwe were leaving for Euston."
"I will order a four-wheeler. In a quarter of an hour we shall be atyour service. If you are telegraphing home, Mr. Huxtable, it would bewell to allow the people in your neighbourhood to imagine that theinquiry is still going on in Liverpool, or wherever else that redherring led your pack. In the meantime I will do a little quiet workat your own doors, and perhaps the scent is not so cold but that twoold hounds like Watson and myself may get a sniff of it."
That evening found us in the cold, bracing atmosphere of the Peakcountry, in which Dr. Huxtable's famous school is situated. It wasalready dark when we reached it. A card was lying on the hall table,and the butler whispered something to his master, who turned to uswith agitation in every heavy feature.
"The Duke is here," said he. "The Duke and Mr. Wilder are in thestudy. Come, gentlemen, and I will introduce you."
I was, of course, familiar with the pictures of the famous statesman,but the man himself was very different from his representation. Hewas a tall and stately person, scrupulously dressed, with a drawn,thin face, and a nose which was grotesquely curved and long. Hiscomplexion was of a dead pallor, which was more startling by contrastwith a long, dwindling beard of vivid red, which flowed down over hiswhite waistcoat, with his watch-chain gleaming through its fringe.Such was the stately presence who looked stonily at us from thecentre of Dr. Huxtable's hearthrug. Beside him stood a very youngman, whom I understood to be Wilder, the private secretary. He wassmall, nervous, alert, with intelligent, light-blue eyes and mobilefeatures. It was he who at once, in an incisive and positive tone,opened the conversation.
"I called this morning, Dr. Huxtable, too late to prevent you fromstarting for London. I learned that your object was to invite Mr.Sherlock Holmes to undertake the conduct of this case. His Grace issurprised, Dr. Huxtable, that you should have taken such a stepwithout consulting him."
"When I learned that the police had failed--"
"His Grace is by no means convinced that the police have failed."
"But surely, Mr. Wilder--"
"You are well aware, Dr. Huxtable, that his Grace is particularlyanxious to avoid all public scandal. He prefers to take as few peopleas possible into his confidence."
"The matter can be easily remedied," said the brow-beaten doctor;"Mr. Sherlock Holmes can return to London by the morning train."
"Hardly that, Doctor, hardly that," said Holmes, in his blandestvoice. "This northern air is invigorating and pleasant, so I proposeto spend a few days upon your moors, and to occupy my mind as best Imay. Whether I have the shelter of your roof or of the village innis, of course, for you to decide."
I could see that the unfortunate doctor was in the last stage ofindecision, from which he was rescued by the deep, sonorous voice ofthe red-bearded Duke, which boomed out like a dinner-gong.
"I agree with Mr. Wilder, Dr. Huxtable, that you would have donewisely to consult me. But since Mr. Holmes has already been takeninto your confidence, it would indeed be absurd that we should notavail ourselves of his services. Far from going to the inn, Mr.Holmes, I should be pleased if you would come and stay with me atHoldernesse Hall."
"I thank your Grace. For the purposes of my investigation I thinkthat it would be wiser for me to remain at the scene of the mystery."
"Just as you like, Mr. Holmes. Any information which Mr. Wilder or Ican give you is, of course, at your disposal."
"It will probably be necessary for me to see you at the Hall," saidHolmes. "I would only ask you now, sir, whether you have formed anyexplanation in your own mind as to the mysterious disappearance ofyour son?"
"No, sir, I have not."
"Excuse me if I allude to that which is painful to you, but I have noalternative. Do you think that the Duchess had anything to do withthe matter?"
The great Minister showed perceptible hesitation.
"I do not think so," he said, at last.
"The other most obvious explanation is that the child has beenkidnapped for the purpose of levying ransom. You have not had anydemand of the sort?"
"No, sir."
"One more question, your Grace. I understand that you wrote to yourson upon the day when this incident occurred."
"No; I wrote upon the day before."
"Exactly. But he received it on that day?"
"Yes."
"Was there anything in your letter which might have unbalanced him orinduced him to take such a step?"
"No, sir, certainly not."
"Did you post that letter yourself?"
The nobleman's reply was interrupted by his secretary, who broke inwith some heat.
"His Grace is not in the habit of posting letters himself," said he."This letter was laid with others upon the study table, and I myselfput them in the post-bag."
"You are sure this one was among them?"
"Yes; I observed it."
"How many letters did your Grace write that day?"
"Twenty or thirty. I have a large correspondence. But surely this issomewhat irrelevant?"
"Not entirely," said Holmes.
"For my own part," the Duke continued, "I have advised the police toturn their attention to the South of France. I have already said thatI do not believe that the Duchess would encourage so monstrous anaction, but the lad had the most wrong-headed opinions, and it ispossible that he may have fled to her, aided and abetted by thisGerman. I think, Dr. Huxtable, that we will now return to the Hall."
I could see that there were other questions which Holmes would havewished to put; but the nobleman's abrupt manner showed that theinterview was at an end. It was evident that to his intenselyaristocratic nature this discussion of his intimate family affairswith a stranger was most abhorrent, and that he feared lest everyfresh question would throw a fiercer light into the discreetlyshadowed corners of his ducal history.
When the nobleman and his secretary had left, my friend flung himselfat once with characteristic eagerness into the investigation.
The boy's chamber was carefully examined, and yielded nothing savethe absolute conviction that it was only through the window that hecould have escaped. The German master's room and effects gave nofurther clue. In his case a trailer of ivy had given way under hisweight, and we saw by the light of a lantern the mark on the lawnwhere his heels had come down. That one dint in the short green grasswas the only material witness left of this inexplicable nocturnalflight.
Sherlock Holmes left the house alone, and only returned after eleven.He had obtained a large ordnance map of the neighbourhood, and thishe brought into my room, where he laid it out on the bed, and, havingbalanced the lamp in the middle of it, he began to smoke over it, andoccasionally to point out objects of interest with the reeking amberof his pipe.
"This case grows upon me, Watson," said he. "There are decidedly somepoints of interest in connection with it. In this early stage I wantyou to realize those geographical features which may have a good dealto do with our investigation.
"Look at this map. This dark square is the Priory School. I'll put apin in it. Now, this line is the main road. You see that it runs eastand west past the school, and you see also that there is no side roadfor a mile either way. If these two folk passed away by road it wasthis road."
[ Picture: Chart of the surrounding area ]
"Exactly."
"By a singular and happy chance we are able to some extent to checkwhat passed along this road during the night in question. At thispoint, where my pipe is now resting, a country constable was on dutyfrom twelve to six. It is, as you perceive, the first cross road onthe east side. This man declares that he was not absent from his postfor an instant, and he is positive that neither boy nor man couldhave gone that way unseen. I have spoken with this policemanto-night, and he appears to me to be a perfectly reliable person.That blocks this end. We have now to deal with the other. There is aninn here, the Red Bull, the landlady of which was ill. She had sentto Mackleton for a doctor, but he did not arrive until morning, beingabsent at another case. The people at the inn were alert all night,awaiting his coming, and one or other of them seems to havecontinually had an eye upon the road. They declare that no onepassed. If their evidence is good, then we are fortunate enough to beable to block the west, and also to be able to say that the fugitivesdid not use the road at all."
"But the bicycle?" I objected.
"Quite so. We will come to the bicycle presently. To continue ourreasoning: if these people did not go by the road, they must havetraversed the country to the north of the house or to the south ofthe house. That is certain. Let us weigh the one against the other.On the south of the house is, as you perceive, a large district ofarable land, cut up into small fields, with stone walls between them.There, I admit that a bicycle is impossible. We can dismiss the idea.We turn to the country on the north. Here there lies a grove oftrees, marked as the 'Ragged Shaw,' and on the farther side stretchesa great rolling moor, Lower Gill Moor, extending for ten miles andsloping gradually upwards. Here, at one side of this wilderness, isHoldernesse Hall, ten miles by road, but only six across the moor. Itis a peculiarly desolate plain. A few moor farmers have smallholdings, where they rear sheep and cattle. Except these, the ploverand the curlew are the only inhabitants until you come to theChesterfield high road. There is a church there, you see, a fewcottages, and an inn. Beyond that the hills become precipitous.Surely it is here to the north that our quest must lie."
"But the bicycle?" I persisted.
"Well, well!" said Holmes, impatiently. "A good cyclist does not needa high road. The moor is intersected with paths and the moon was atthe full. Halloa! what is this?"
There was an agitated knock at the door, and an instant afterwardsDr. Huxtable was in the room. In his hand he held a blue cricket-cap,with a white chevron on the peak.
"At last we have a clue!" he cried. "Thank Heaven! at last we are onthe dear boy's track! It is his cap."
"Where was it found?"
"In the van of the gipsies who camped on the moor. They left onTuesday. To-day the police traced them down and examined theircaravan. This was found."
"How do they account for it?"
"They shuffled and lied--said that they found it on the moor onTuesday morning. They know where he is, the rascals! Thank goodness,they are all safe under lock and key. Either the fear of the law orthe Duke's purse will certainly get out of them all that they know."
"So far, so good," said Holmes, when the doctor had at last left theroom. "It at least bears out the theory that it is on the side of theLower Gill Moor that we must hope for results. The police have reallydone nothing locally, save the arrest of these gipsies. Look here,Watson! There is a watercourse across the moor. You see it markedhere in the map. In some parts it widens into a morass. This isparticularly so in the region between Holdernesse Hall and theschool. It is vain to look elsewhere for tracks in this dry weather;but at that point there is certainly a chance of some record beingleft. I will call you early to-morrow morning, and you and I will tryif we can throw some little light upon the mystery."
The day was just breaking when I woke to find the long, thin form ofHolmes by my bedside. He was fully dressed, and had apparentlyalready been out.
"I have done the lawn and the bicycle shed," said he. "I have alsohad a ramble through the Ragged Shaw. Now, Watson, there is cocoaready in the next room. I must beg you to hurry, for we have a greatday before us."
His eyes shone, and his cheek was flushed with the exhilaration ofthe master workman who sees his work lie ready before him. A verydifferent Holmes, this active, alert man, from the introspective andpallid dreamer of Baker Street. I felt, as I looked upon that supplefigure, alive with nervous energy, that it was indeed a strenuous daythat awaited us.
And yet it opened in the blackest disappointment. With high hopes westruck across the peaty, russet moor, intersected with a thousandsheep paths, until we came to the broad, light-green belt whichmarked the morass between us and Holdernesse. Certainly, if the ladhad gone homewards, he must have passed this, and he could not passit without leaving his traces. But no sign of him or the German couldbe seen. With a darkening face my friend strode along the margin,eagerly observant of every muddy stain upon the mossy surface.Sheep-marks there were in profusion, and at one place, some milesdown, cows had left their tracks. Nothing more.
"Check number one," said Holmes, looking gloomily over the rollingexpanse of the moor. "There is another morass down yonder and anarrow neck between. Halloa! halloa! halloa! what have we here?"
We had come on a small black ribbon of pathway. In the middle of it,clearly marked on the sodden soil, was the track of a bicycle.
"Hurrah!" I cried. "We have it."
But Holmes was shaking his head, and his face was puzzled andexpectant rather than joyous.
"A bicycle, certainly, but not the bicycle," said he. "I am familiarwith forty-two different impressions left by tyres. This, as youperceive, is a Dunlop, with a patch upon the outer cover. Heidegger'styres were Palmer's, leaving longitudinal stripes. Aveling, themathematical master, was sure upon the point. Therefore, it is notHeidegger's track."
"The boy's, then?"
"Possibly, if we could prove a bicycle to have been in hispossession. But this we have utterly failed to do. This track, as youperceive, was made by a rider who was going from the direction of theschool."
"Or towards it?"
"No, no, my dear Watson. The more deeply sunk impression is, ofcourse, the hind wheel, upon which the weight rests. You perceiveseveral places where it has passed across and obliterated the moreshallow mark of the front one. It was undoubtedly heading away fromthe school. It may or may not be connected with our inquiry, but wewill follow it backwards before we go any farther."
We did so, and at the end of a few hundred yards lost the tracks aswe emerged from the boggy portion of the moor. Following the pathbackwards, we picked out another spot, where a spring trickled acrossit. Here, once again, was the mark of the bicycle, though nearlyobliterated by the hoofs of cows. After that there was no sign, butthe path ran right on into Ragged Shaw, the wood which backed on tothe school. From this wood the cycle must have emerged. Holmes satdown on a boulder and rested his chin in his hands. I had smoked twocigarettes before he moved.
"Well, well," said he, at last. "It is, of course, possible that acunning man might change the tyre of his bicycle in order to leaveunfamiliar tracks. A criminal who was capable of such a thought is aman whom I should be proud to do business with. We will leave thisquestion undecided and hark back to our morass again, for we haveleft a good deal unexplored."
We continued our systematic survey of the edge of the sodden portionof the moor, and soon our perseverance was gloriously rewarded. Rightacross the lower part of the bog lay a miry path. Holmes gave a cryof delight as he approached it. An impression like a fine bundle oftelegraph wires ran down the centre of it. It was the Palmer tyre.
"Here is Herr Heidegger, sure enough!" cried Holmes, exultantly. "Myreasoning seems to have been pretty sound, Watson."
"I congratulate you."
"But we have a long way still to go. Kindly walk clear of the path.Now let us follow the trail. I fear that it will not lead very far."
We found, however, as we advanced that this portion of the moor isintersected with soft patches, and, though we frequently lost sightof the track, we always succeeded in picking it up once more.
"Do you observe," said Holmes, "that the rider is now undoubtedlyforcing the pace? There can be no doubt of it. Look at thisimpression, where you get both tyres clear. The one is as deep as theother. That can only mean that the rider is throwing his weight on tothe handle-bar, as a man does when he is sprinting. By Jove! he hashad a fall."
There was a broad, irregular smudge covering some yards of the track.Then there were a few footmarks, and the tyre reappeared once more.
"A side-slip," I suggested.
Holmes held up a crumpled branch of flowering gorse. To my horror Iperceived that the yellow blossoms were all dabbled with crimson. Onthe path, too, and among the heather were dark stains of clottedblood.
"Bad!" said Holmes. "Bad! Stand clear, Watson! Not an unnecessaryfootstep! What do I read here? He fell wounded, he stood up, heremounted, he proceeded. But there is no other track. Cattle on thisside path. He was surely not gored by a bull? Impossible! But I seeno traces of anyone else. We must push on, Watson. Surely with stainsas well as the track to guide us he cannot escape us now."
Our search was not a very long one. The tracks of the tyre began tocurve fantastically upon the wet and shining path. Suddenly, as Ilooked ahead, the gleam of metal caught my eye from amid the thickgorse bushes. Out of them we dragged a bicycle, Palmer-tyred, onepedal bent, and the whole front of it horribly smeared and slobberedwith blood. On the other side of the bushes a shoe was projecting. Weran round, and there lay the unfortunate rider. He was a tall man,full bearded, with spectacles, one glass of which had been knockedout. The cause of his death was a frightful blow upon the head, whichhad crushed in part of his skull. That he could have gone on afterreceiving such an injury said much for the vitality and courage ofthe man. He wore shoes, but no socks, and his open coat disclosed anight-shirt beneath it. It was undoubtedly the German master.
Holmes turned the body over reverently, and examined it with greatattention. He then sat in deep thought for a time, and I could see byhis ruffled brow that this grim discovery had not, in his opinion,advanced us much in our inquiry.
"It is a little difficult to know what to do, Watson," said he, atlast. "My own inclinations are to push this inquiry on, for we havealready lost so much time that we cannot afford to waste anotherhour. On the other hand, we are bound to inform the police of thediscovery, and to see that this poor fellow's body is looked after."
"I could take a note back."
"But I need your company and assistance. Wait a bit! There is afellow cutting peat up yonder. Bring him over here, and he will guidethe police."
I brought the peasant across, and Holmes dispatched the frightenedman with a note to Dr. Huxtable.
"Now, Watson," said he, "we have picked up two clues this morning.One is the bicycle with the Palmer tyre, and we see what that has ledto. The other is the bicycle with the patched Dunlop. Before we startto investigate that, let us try to realize what we do know so as tomake the most of it, and to separate the essential from theaccidental."
"First of all I wish to impress upon you that the boy certainly leftof his own free will. He got down from his window and he went off,either alone or with someone. That is sure."
I assented.
"Well, now, let us turn to this unfortunate German master. The boywas fully dressed when he fled. Therefore, he foresaw what he woulddo. But the German went without his socks. He certainly acted on veryshort notice."
"Undoubtedly."
"Why did he go? Because, from his bedroom window, he saw the flightof the boy. Because he wished to overtake him and bring him back. Heseized his bicycle, pursued the lad, and in pursuing him met hisdeath."
"So it would seem."
"Now I come to the critical part of my argument. The natural actionof a man in pursuing a little boy would be to run after him. He wouldknow that he could overtake him. But the German does not do so. Heturns to his bicycle. I am told that he was an excellent cyclist. Hewould not do this if he did not see that the boy had some swift meansof escape."
"The other bicycle."
"Let us continue our reconstruction. He meets his death five milesfrom the school--not by a bullet, mark you, which even a lad mightconceivably discharge, but by a savage blow dealt by a vigorous arm.The lad, then, had a companion in his flight. And the flight was aswift one, since it took five miles before an expert cyclist couldovertake them. Yet we survey the ground round the scene of thetragedy. What do we find? A few cattle tracks, nothing more. I took awide sweep round, and there is no path within fifty yards. Anothercyclist could have had nothing to do with the actual murder. Nor werethere any human footmarks."
"Holmes," I cried, "this is impossible."
"Admirable!" he said. "A most illuminating remark. It is impossibleas I state it, and therefore I must in some respect have stated itwrong. Yet you saw for yourself. Can you suggest any fallacy?"
"He could not have fractured his skull in a fall?"
"In a morass, Watson?"
"I am at my wit's end."
"Tut, tut; we have solved some worse problems. At least we haveplenty of material, if we can only use it. Come, then, and, havingexhausted the Palmer, let us see what the Dunlop with the patchedcover has to offer us."
We picked up the track and followed it onwards for some distance; butsoon the moor rose into a long, heather-tufted curve, and we left thewatercourse behind us. No further help from tracks could be hopedfor. At the spot where we saw the last of the Dunlop tyre it mightequally have led to Holdernesse Hall, the stately towers of whichrose some miles to our left, or to a low, grey village which lay infront of us, and marked the position of the Chesterfield high road.
As we approached the forbidding and squalid inn, with the sign of agame-cock above the door, Holmes gave a sudden groan and clutched meby the shoulder to save himself from falling. He had had one of thoseviolent strains of the ankle which leave a man helpless. Withdifficulty he limped up to the door, where a squat, dark, elderly manwas smoking a black clay pipe.
"How are you, Mr. Reuben Hayes?" said Holmes.
"Who are you, and how do you get my name so pat?" the countrymananswered, with a suspicious flash of a pair of cunning eyes.
"Well, it's printed on the board above your head. It's easy to see aman who is master of his own house. I suppose you haven't such athing as a carriage in your stables?"
"No; I have not."
"I can hardly put my foot to the ground."
"Don't put it to the ground."
"But I can't walk."
"Well, then, hop."
Mr. Reuben Hayes's manner was far from gracious, but Holmes took itwith admirable good-humour.
"Look here, my man," said he. "This is really rather an awkward fixfor me. I don't mind how I get on."
"Neither do I," said the morose landlord.
"The matter is very important. I would offer you a sovereign for theuse of a bicycle."
The landlord pricked up his ears.
"Where do you want to go?"
"To Holdernesse Hall."
"Pals of the Dook, I suppose?" said the landlord, surveying ourmud-stained garments with ironical eyes.
Holmes laughed good-naturedly.
"He'll be glad to see us, anyhow."
"Why?"
"Because we bring him news of his lost son."
The landlord gave a very visible start.
"What, you're on his track?"
"He has been heard of in Liverpool. They expect to get him everyhour."
Again a swift change passed over the heavy, unshaven face. His mannerwas suddenly genial.
"I've less reason to wish the Dook well than most men," said he, "forI was his head coachman once, and cruel bad he treated me. It was himthat sacked me without a character on the word of a lyingcorn-chandler. But I'm glad to hear that the young lord was heard ofin Liverpool, and I'll help you to take the news to the Hall."
"Thank you," said Holmes. "We'll have some food first. Then you canbring round the bicycle."
"I haven't got a bicycle."
Holmes held up a sovereign.
"I tell you, man, that I haven't got one. I'll let you have twohorses as far as the Hall."
"Well, well," said Holmes, "we'll talk about it when we've hadsomething to eat."
When we were left alone in the stone-flagged kitchen it wasastonishing how rapidly that sprained ankle recovered. It was nearlynightfall, and we had eaten nothing since early morning, so that wespent some time over our meal. Holmes was lost in thought, and onceor twice he walked over to the window and stared earnestly out. Itopened on to a squalid courtyard. In the far corner was a smithy,where a grimy lad was at work. On the other side were the stables.Holmes had sat down again after one of these excursions, when hesuddenly sprang out of his chair with a loud exclamation.
"By Heaven, Watson, I believe that I've got it!" he cried. "Yes, yes,it must be so. Watson, do you remember seeing any cow-tracks to-day?"
"Yes, several."
"Where?"
"Well, everywhere. They were at the morass, and again on the path,and again near where poor Heidegger met his death."
"Exactly. Well, now, Watson, how many cows did you see on the moor?"
"I don't remember seeing any."
"Strange, Watson, that we should see tracks all along our line, butnever a cow on the whole moor; very strange, Watson, eh?"
"Yes, it is strange."
"Now, Watson, make an effort; throw your mind back! Can you see thosetracks upon the path?"
"Yes, I can."
"Can you recall that the tracks were sometimes like that, Watson"--hearranged a number of bread-crumbs in this fashion--: : : : :--"andsometimes like this"--: ` : ` : ` : `--"and occasionally likethis"--. ` . ` . ` . "Can you remember that?"
"No, I cannot."
"But I can. I could swear to it. However, we will go back at ourleisure and verify it. What a blind beetle I have been not to draw myconclusion!"
"And what is your conclusion?"
"Only that it is a remarkable cow which walks, canters, and gallops.By George, Watson, it was no brain of a country publican that thoughtout such a blind as that! The coast seems to be clear, save for thatlad in the smithy. Let us slip out and see what we can see."
There were two rough-haired, unkempt horses in the tumble-downstable. Holmes raised the hind leg of one of them and laughed aloud.
"Old shoes, but newly shod--old shoes, but new nails. This casedeserves to be a classic. Let us go across to the smithy."
The lad continued his work without regarding us. I saw Holmes's eyedarting to right and left among the litter of iron and wood which wasscattered about the floor. Suddenly, however, we heard a step behindus, and there was the landlord, his heavy eyebrows drawn over hissavage eyes, his swarthy features convulsed with passion. He held ashort, metal-headed stick in his hand, and he advanced in so menacinga fashion that I was right glad to feel the revolver in my pocket.
"You infernal spies!" the man cried. "What are you doing there?"
"Why, Mr. Reuben Hayes," said Holmes, coolly, "one might think thatyou were afraid of our finding something out."
The man mastered himself with a violent effort, and his grim mouthloosened into a false laugh, which was more menacing than his frown.
"You're welcome to all you can find out in my smithy," said he. "Butlook here, mister, I don't care for folk poking about my placewithout my leave, so the sooner you pay your score and get out ofthis the better I shall be pleased."
"All right, Mr. Hayes--no harm meant," said Holmes. "We have beenhaving a look at your horses, but I think I'll walk after all. It'snot far, I believe."
"Not more than two miles to the Hall gates. That's the road to theleft." He watched us with sullen eyes until we had left his premises.
We did not go very far along the road, for Holmes stopped the instantthat the curve hid us from the landlord's view.
"We were warm, as the children say, at that inn," said he. "I seem togrow colder every step that I take away from it. No, no; I can'tpossibly leave it."
"I am convinced," said I, "that this Reuben Hayes knows all about it.A more self-evident villain I never saw."
"Oh! he impressed you in that way, did he? There are the horses,there is the smithy. Yes, it is an interesting place, this FightingCock. I think we shall have another look at it in an unobtrusiveway."
A long, sloping hillside, dotted with grey limestone boulders,stretched behind us. We had turned off the road, and were making ourway up the hill, when, looking in the direction of Holdernesse Hall,I saw a cyclist coming swiftly along.
"Get down, Watson!" cried Holmes, with a heavy hand upon my shoulder.We had hardly sunk from view when the man flew past us on the road.Amid a rolling cloud of dust I caught a glimpse of a pale, agitatedface--a face with horror in every lineament, the mouth open, the eyesstaring wildly in front. It was like some strange caricature of thedapper James Wilder whom we had seen the night before.
"The Duke's secretary!" cried Holmes. "Come, Watson, let us see whathe does."
We scrambled from rock to rock until in a few moments we had made ourway to a point from which we could see the front door of the inn.Wilder's bicycle was leaning against the wall beside it. No one wasmoving about the house, nor could we catch a glimpse of any faces atthe windows. Slowly the twilight crept down as the sun sank behindthe high towers of Holdernesse Hall. Then in the gloom we saw the twoside-lamps of a trap light up in the stable yard of the inn, andshortly afterwards heard the rattle of hoofs, as it wheeled out intothe road and tore off at a furious pace in the direction ofChesterfield.
"What do you make of that, Watson?" Holmes whispered.
"It looks like a flight."
"A single man in a dog-cart, so far as I could see. Well, itcertainly was not Mr. James Wilder, for there he is at the door."
A red square of light had sprung out of the darkness. In the middleof it was the black figure of the secretary, his head advanced,peering out into the night. It was evident that he was expectingsomeone. Then at last there were steps in the road, a second figurewas visible for an instant against the light, the door shut, and allwas black once more. Five minutes later a lamp was lit in a room uponthe first floor.
"It seems to be a curious class of custom that is done by theFighting Cock," said Holmes.
"The bar is on the other side."
"Quite so. These are what one may call the private guests. Now, whatin the world is Mr. James Wilder doing in that den at this hour ofnight, and who is the companion who comes to meet him there? Come,Watson, we must really take a risk and try to investigate this alittle more closely."
Together we stole down to the road and crept across to the door ofthe inn. The bicycle still leaned against the wall. Holmes struck amatch and held it to the back wheel, and I heard him chuckle as thelight fell upon a patched Dunlop tyre. Up above us was the lightedwindow.
"I must have a peep through that, Watson. If you bend your back andsupport yourself upon the wall, I think that I can manage."
An instant later his feet were on my shoulders. But he was hardly upbefore he was down again.
"Come, my friend," said he, "our day's work has been quite longenough. I think that we have gathered all that we can. It's a longwalk to the school, and the sooner we get started the better."
He hardly opened his lips during that weary trudge across the moor,nor would he enter the school when he reached it, but went on toMackleton Station, whence he could send some telegrams. Late at nightI heard him consoling Dr. Huxtable, prostrated by the tragedy of hismaster's death, and later still he entered my room as alert andvigorous as he had been when he started in the morning. "All goeswell, my friend," said he. "I promise that before to-morrow eveningwe shall have reached the solution of the mystery."
At eleven o'clock next morning my friend and I were walking up thefamous yew avenue of Holdernesse Hall. We were ushered through themagnificent Elizabethan doorway and into his Grace's study. There wefound Mr. James Wilder, demure and courtly, but with some trace ofthat wild terror of the night before still lurking in his furtiveeyes and in his twitching features.
"You have come to see his Grace? I am sorry; but the fact is that theDuke is far from well. He has been very much upset by the tragicnews. We received a telegram from Dr. Huxtable yesterday afternoon,which told us of your discovery."
"I must see the Duke, Mr. Wilder."
"But he is in his room."
"Then I must go to his room."
"I believe he is in his bed."
"I will see him there."
Holmes's cold and inexorable manner showed the secretary that it wasuseless to argue with him.
"Very good, Mr. Holmes; I will tell him that you are here."
After half an hour's delay the great nobleman appeared. His face wasmore cadaverous than ever, his shoulders had rounded, and he seemedto me to be an altogether older man than he had been the morningbefore. He greeted us with a stately courtesy and seated himself athis desk, his red beard streaming down on to the table.
"Well, Mr. Holmes?" said he.
But my friend's eyes were fixed upon the secretary, who stood by hismaster's chair.
"I think, your Grace, that I could speak more freely in Mr. Wilder'sabsence."
The man turned a shade paler and cast a malignant glance at Holmes.
"If your Grace wishes--"
"Yes, yes; you had better go. Now, Mr. Holmes, what have you to say?"
My friend waited until the door had closed behind the retreatingsecretary.
"The fact is, your Grace," said he, "that my colleague, Dr. Watson,and myself had an assurance from Dr. Huxtable that a reward had beenoffered in this case. I should like to have this confirmed from yourown lips."
"Certainly, Mr. Holmes."
"It amounted, if I am correctly informed, to five thousand pounds toanyone who will tell you where your son is?"
"Exactly."
"And another thousand to the man who will name the person or personswho keep him in custody?"
"Exactly."
"Under the latter heading is included, no doubt, not only those whomay have taken him away, but also those who conspire to keep him inhis present position?"
"Yes, yes," cried the Duke, impatiently. "If you do your work well,Mr. Sherlock Holmes, you will have no reason to complain of niggardlytreatment."
My friend rubbed his thin hands together with an appearance ofavidity which was a surprise to me, who knew his frugal tastes.
"I fancy that I see your Grace's cheque-book upon the table," saidhe. "I should be glad if you would make me out a cheque for sixthousand pounds. It would be as well, perhaps, for you to cross it.The Capital and Counties Bank, Oxford Street branch, are my agents."
His Grace sat very stern and upright in his chair, and looked stonilyat my friend.
"Is this a joke, Mr. Holmes? It is hardly a subject for pleasantry."
"Not at all, your Grace. I was never more earnest in my life."
"What do you mean, then?"
"I mean that I have earned the reward. I know where your son is, andI know some, at least, of those who are holding him."
The Duke's beard had turned more aggressively red than ever againsthis ghastly white face.
"Where is he?" he gasped. 
"He is, or was last night, at the Fighting Cock Inn, about two milesfrom your park gate."
The Duke fell back in his chair.
"And whom do you accuse?"
Sherlock Holmes's answer was an astounding one. He stepped swiftlyforward and touched the Duke upon the shoulder.
"I accuse you," said he. "And now, your Grace, I'll trouble you forthat cheque."
Never shall I forget the Duke's appearance as he sprang up and clawedwith his hands like one who is sinking into an abyss. Then, with anextraordinary effort of aristocratic self-command, he sat down andsank his face in his hands. It was some minutes before he spoke.
"How much do you know?" he asked at last, without raising his head.
"I saw you together last night."
"Does anyone else besides your friend know?"
"I have spoken to no one."
The Duke took a pen in his quivering fingers and opened hischeque-book.
"I shall be as good as my word, Mr. Holmes. I am about to write yourcheque, however unwelcome the information which you have gained maybe to me. When the offer was first made I little thought the turnwhich events might take. But you and your friend are men ofdiscretion, Mr. Holmes?"
"I hardly understand your Grace."
"I must put it plainly, Mr. Holmes. If only you two know of thisincident, there is no reason why it should go any farther. I thinktwelve thousand pounds is the sum that I owe you, is it not?"
But Holmes smiled and shook his head.
"I fear, your Grace, that matters can hardly be arranged so easily.There is the death of this schoolmaster to be accounted for."
"But James knew nothing of that. You cannot hold him responsible forthat. It was the work of this brutal ruffian whom he had themisfortune to employ."
"I must take the view, your Grace, that when a man embarks upon acrime he is morally guilty of any other crime which may spring fromit."
"Morally, Mr. Holmes. No doubt you are right. But surely not in theeyes of the law. A man cannot be condemned for a murder at which hewas not present, and which he loathes and abhors as much as you do.The instant that he heard of it he made a complete confession to me,so filled was he with horror and remorse. He lost not an hour inbreaking entirely with the murderer. Oh, Mr. Holmes, you must savehim--you must save him! I tell you that you must save him!" The Dukehad dropped the last attempt at self-command, and was pacing the roomwith a convulsed face and with his clenched hands raving in the air.At last he mastered himself and sat down once more at his desk. "Iappreciate your conduct in coming here before you spoke to anyoneelse," said he. "At least, we may take counsel how far we canminimize this hideous scandal."
"Exactly," said Holmes. "I think, your Grace, that this can only bedone by absolute and complete frankness between us. I am disposed tohelp your Grace to the best of my ability; but in order to do so Imust understand to the last detail how the matter stands. I realizethat your words applied to Mr. James Wilder, and that he is not themurderer."
"No; the murderer has escaped."
Sherlock Holmes smiled demurely.
"Your Grace can hardly have heard of any small reputation which Ipossess, or you would not imagine that it is so easy to escape me.Mr. Reuben Hayes was arrested at Chesterfield on my information ateleven o'clock last night. I had a telegram from the head of thelocal police before I left the school this morning."
The Duke leaned back in his chair and stared with amazement at myfriend.
"You seem to have powers that are hardly human," said he. "So ReubenHayes is taken? I am right glad to hear it, if it will not react uponthe fate of James."
"Your secretary?"
"No, sir; my son."
It was Holmes's turn to look astonished.
"I confess that this is entirely new to me, your Grace. I must begyou to be more explicit."
"I will conceal nothing from you. I agree with you that completefrankness, however painful it may be to me, is the best policy inthis desperate situation to which James's folly and jealousy havereduced us. When I was a very young man, Mr. Holmes, I loved withsuch a love as comes only once in a lifetime. I offered the ladymarriage, but she refused it on the grounds that such a match mightmar my career. Had she lived I would certainly never have marriedanyone else. She died, and left this one child, whom for her sake Ihave cherished and cared for. I could not acknowledge the paternityto the world; but I gave him the best of educations, and since hecame to manhood I have kept him near my person. He surprised mysecret, and has presumed ever since upon the claim which he has uponme and upon his power of provoking a scandal, which would beabhorrent to me. His presence had something to do with the unhappyissue of my marriage. Above all, he hated my young legitimate heirfrom the first with a persistent hatred. You may well ask me why,under these circumstances, I still kept James under my roof. I answerthat it was because I could see his mother's face in his, and thatfor her dear sake there was no end to my long-suffering. All herpretty ways, too--there was not one of them which he could notsuggest and bring back to my memory. I could not send him away. But Ifeared so much lest he should do Arthur--that is, Lord Saltire--amischief that I dispatched him for safety to Dr. Huxtable's school.
"James came into contact with this fellow Hayes because the man was atenant of mine, and James acted as agent. The fellow was a rascalfrom the beginning; but in some extraordinary way James becameintimate with him. He had always a taste for low company. When Jamesdetermined to kidnap Lord Saltire it was of this man's service thathe availed himself. You remember that I wrote to Arthur upon thatlast day. Well, James opened the letter and inserted a note askingArthur to meet him in a little wood called the Ragged Shaw, which isnear to the school. He used the Duchess's name, and in that way gotthe boy to come. That evening James bicycled over--I am telling youwhat he has himself confessed to me--and he told Arthur, whom he metin the wood, that his mother longed to see him, that she was awaitinghim on the moor, and that if he would come back into the wood atmidnight he would find a man with a horse, who would take him to her.Poor Arthur fell into the trap. He came to the appointment and foundthis fellow Hayes with a led pony. Arthur mounted, and they set offtogether. It appears--though this James only heard yesterday--thatthey were pursued, that Hayes struck the pursuer with his stick, andthat the man died of his injuries. Hayes brought Arthur to hispublic-house, the Fighting Cock, where he was confined in an upperroom, under the care of Mrs. Hayes, who is a kindly woman, butentirely under the control of her brutal husband.
"Well, Mr. Holmes, that was the state of affairs when I first saw youtwo days ago. I had no more idea of the truth than you. You will askme what was James's motive in doing such a deed. I answer that therewas a great deal which was unreasoning and fanatical in the hatredwhich he bore my heir. In his view he should himself have been heirof all my estates, and he deeply resented those social laws whichmade it impossible. At the same time he had a definite motive also.He was eager that I should break the entail, and he was of opinionthat it lay in my power to do so. He intended to make a bargain withme--to restore Arthur if I would break the entail, and so make itpossible for the estate to be left to him by will. He knew well thatI should never willingly invoke the aid of the police against him. Isay that he would have proposed such a bargain to me, but he did notactually do so, for events moved too quickly for him, and he had nottime to put his plans into practice.
"What brought all his wicked scheme to wreck was your discovery ofthis man Heidegger's dead body. James was seized with horror at thenews. It came to us yesterday as we sat together in this study. Dr.Huxtable had sent a telegram. James was so overwhelmed with grief andagitation that my suspicions, which had never been entirely absent,rose instantly to a certainty, and I taxed him with the deed. He madea complete voluntary confession. Then he implored me to keep hissecret for three days longer, so as to give his wretched accomplice achance of saving his guilty life. I yielded--as I have alwaysyielded--to his prayers, and instantly James hurried off to theFighting Cock to warn Hayes and give him the means of flight. I couldnot go there by daylight without provoking comment, but as soon asnight fell I hurried off to see my dear Arthur. I found him safe andwell, but horrified beyond expression by the dreadful deed he hadwitnessed. In deference to my promise, and much against my will, Iconsented to leave him there for three days under the charge of Mrs.Hayes, since it was evident that it was impossible to inform thepolice where he was without telling them also who was the murderer,and I could not see how that murderer could be punished without ruinto my unfortunate James. You asked for frankness, Mr. Holmes, and Ihave taken you at your word, for I have now told you everythingwithout an attempt at circumlocution or concealment. Do you in turnbe as frank with me."
"I will," said Holmes. "In the first place, your Grace, I am bound totell you that you have placed yourself in a most serious position inthe eyes of the law. You have condoned a felony and you have aidedthe escape of a murderer; for I cannot doubt that any money which wastaken by James Wilder to aid his accomplice in his flight came fromyour Grace's purse."
The Duke bowed his assent.
"This is indeed a most serious matter. Even more culpable in myopinion, your Grace, is your attitude towards your younger son. Youleave him in this den for three days."
"Under solemn promises--"
"What are promises to such people as these? You have no guaranteethat he will not be spirited away again. To humour your guilty elderson you have exposed your innocent younger son to imminent andunnecessary danger. It was a most unjustifiable action."
The proud lord of Holdernesse was not accustomed to be so rated inhis own ducal hall. The blood flushed into his high forehead, but hisconscience held him dumb.
"I will help you, but on one condition only. It is that you ring forthe footman and let me give such orders as I like."
Without a word the Duke pressed the electric bell. A servant entered.
"You will be glad to hear," said Holmes, "that your young master isfound. It is the Duke's desire that the carriage shall go at once tothe Fighting Cock Inn to bring Lord Saltire home.
"Now," said Holmes, when the rejoicing lackey had disappeared,"having secured the future, we can afford to be more lenient with thepast. I am not in an official position, and there is no reason, solong as the ends of justice are served, why I should disclose allthat I know. As to Hayes I say nothing. The gallows awaits him, and Iwould do nothing to save him from it. What he will divulge I cannottell, but I have no doubt that your Grace could make him understandthat it is to his interest to be silent. From the police point ofview he will have kidnapped the boy for the purpose of ransom. Ifthey do not themselves find it out I see no reason why I shouldprompt them to take a broader point of view. I would warn your Grace,however, that the continued presence of Mr. James Wilder in yourhousehold can only lead to misfortune."
"I understand that, Mr. Holmes, and it is already settled that heshall leave me for ever and go to seek his fortune in Australia."
"In that case, your Grace, since you have yourself stated that anyunhappiness in your married life was caused by his presence, I wouldsuggest that you make such amends as you can to the Duchess, and thatyou try to resume those relations which have been so unhappilyinterrupted."
"That also I have arranged, Mr. Holmes. I wrote to the Duchess thismorning."
"In that case," said Holmes, rising, "I think that my friend and Ican congratulate ourselves upon several most happy results from ourlittle visit to the North. There is one other small point upon whichI desire some light. This fellow Hayes had shod his horses with shoeswhich counterfeited the tracks of cows. Was it from Mr. Wilder thathe learned so extraordinary a device?"
The Duke stood in thought for a moment, with a look of intensesurprise on his face. Then he opened a door and showed us into alarge room furnished as a museum. He led the way to a glass case in acorner, and pointed to the inscription.
"These shoes," it ran, "were dug up in the moat of Holdernesse Hall.They are for the use of horses; but they are shaped below with acloven foot of iron, so as to throw pursuers off the track. They aresupposed to have belonged to some of the marauding Barons ofHoldernesse in the Middle Ages."
Holmes opened the case, and moistening his finger he passed it alongthe shoe. A thin film of recent mud was left upon his skin.
"Thank you," said he, as he replaced the glass. "It is the secondmost interesting object that I have seen in the North."
"And the first?"
Holmes folded up his cheque and placed it carefully in his note-book."I am a poor man," said he, as he patted it affectionately and thrustit into the depths of his inner pocket.





                     THE ADVENTURE OF BLACK PETER
I have never known my friend to be in better form, both mental andphysical, than in the year '95. His increasing fame had brought withit an immense practice, and I should be guilty of an indiscretion ifI were even to hint at the identity of some of the illustriousclients who crossed our humble threshold in Baker Street. Holmes,however, like all great artists, lived for his art's sake, and, savein the case of the Duke of Holdernesse, I have seldom known him claimany large reward for his inestimable services. So unworldly washe--or so capricious--that he frequently refused his help to thepowerful and wealthy where the problem made no appeal to hissympathies, while he would devote weeks of most intense applicationto the affairs of some humble client whose case presented thosestrange and dramatic qualities which appealed to his imagination andchallenged his ingenuity.
In this memorable year '95 a curious and incongruous succession ofcases had engaged his attention, ranging from his famousinvestigation of the sudden death of Cardinal Tosca--an inquiry whichwas carried out by him at the express desire of His Holiness thePope--down to his arrest of Wilson, the notorious canary-trainer,which removed a plague-spot from the East-End of London. Close on theheels of these two famous cases came the tragedy of Woodman's Lee,and the very obscure circumstances which surrounded the death ofCaptain Peter Carey. No record of the doings of Mr. Sherlock Holmeswould be complete which did not include some account of this veryunusual affair.
During the first week of July my friend had been absent so often andso long from our lodgings that I knew he had something on hand. Thefact that several rough-looking men called during that time andinquired for Captain Basil made me understand that Holmes was workingsomewhere under one of the numerous disguises and names with which heconcealed his own formidable identity. He had at least five smallrefuges in different parts of London in which he was able to changehis personality. He said nothing of his business to me, and it wasnot my habit to force a confidence. The first positive sign which hegave me of the direction which his investigation was taking was anextraordinary one. He had gone out before breakfast, and I had satdown to mine, when he strode into the room, his hat upon his head anda huge barbed-headed spear tucked like an umbrella under his arm.
"Good gracious, Holmes!" I cried. "You don't mean to say that youhave been walking about London with that thing?"
"I drove to the butcher's and back."
"The butcher's?"
"And I return with an excellent appetite. There can be no question,my dear Watson, of the value of exercise before breakfast. But I amprepared to bet that you will not guess the form that my exercise hastaken."
"I will not attempt it."
He chuckled as he poured out the coffee.
"If you could have looked into Allardyce's back shop you would haveseen a dead pig swung from a hook in the ceiling, and a gentleman inhis shirt-sleeves furiously stabbing at it with this weapon. I wasthat energetic person, and I have satisfied myself that by noexertion of my strength can I transfix the pig with a single blow.Perhaps you would care to try?"
"Not for worlds. But why were you doing this?"
"Because it seemed to me to have an indirect bearing upon the mysteryof Woodman's Lee. Ah, Hopkins, I got your wire last night, and I havebeen expecting you. Come and join us."
Our visitor was an exceedingly alert man, thirty years of age,dressed in a quiet tweed suit, but retaining the erect bearing of onewho was accustomed to official uniform. I recognised him at once asStanley Hopkins, a young police inspector for whose future Holmes hadhigh hopes, while he in turn professed the admiration and respect ofa pupil for the scientific methods of the famous amateur. Hopkins'sbrow was clouded, and he sat down with an air of deep dejection.
"No, thank you, sir. I breakfasted before I came round. I spent thenight in town, for I came up yesterday to report."
"And what had you to report?"
"Failure, sir; absolute failure."
"You have made no progress?"
"None."
"Dear me! I must have a look at the matter."
"I wish to heavens that you would, Mr. Holmes. It's my first bigchance, and I am at my wit's end. For goodness' sake come down andlend me a hand."
"Well, well, it just happens that I have already read all theavailable evidence, including the report of the inquest, with somecare. By the way, what do you make of that tobacco-pouch found on thescene of the crime? Is there no clue there?"
Hopkins looked surprised.
"It was the man's own pouch, sir. His initials were inside it. And itwas of seal-skin--and he an old sealer."
"But he had no pipe."
"No, sir, we could find no pipe; indeed, he smoked very little. Andyet he might have kept some tobacco for his friends."
"No doubt. I only mention it because if I had been handling the caseI should have been inclined to make that the starting-point of myinvestigation. However, my friend Dr. Watson knows nothing of thismatter, and I should be none the worse for hearing the sequence ofevents once more. Just give us some short sketch of the essentials."
Stanley Hopkins drew a slip of paper from his pocket.
"I have a few dates here which will give you the career of the deadman, Captain Peter Carey. He was born in '45--fifty years of age. Hewas a most daring and successful seal and whale fisher. In 1883 hecommanded the steam sealer Sea Unicorn, of Dundee. He had then hadseveral successful voyages in succession, and in the following year,1884, he retired. After that he travelled for some years, and finallyhe bought a small place called Woodman's Lee, near Forest Row, inSussex. There he has lived for six years, and there he died just aweek ago to-day.
"There were some most singular points about the man. In ordinary lifehe was a strict Puritan--a silent, gloomy fellow. His householdconsisted of his wife, his daughter, aged twenty, and two femaleservants. These last were continually changing, for it was never avery cheery situation, and sometimes it became past all bearing. Theman was an intermittent drunkard, and when he had the fit on him hewas a perfect fiend. He has been known to drive his wife and hisdaughter out of doors in the middle of the night, and flog themthrough the park until the whole village outside the gates wasaroused by their screams.
"He was summoned once for a savage assault upon the old vicar, whohad called upon him to remonstrate with him upon his conduct. Inshort, Mr. Holmes, you would go far before you found a more dangerousman than Peter Carey, and I have heard that he bore the samecharacter when he commanded his ship. He was known in the trade asBlack Peter, and the name was given him, not only on account of hisswarthy features and the colour of his huge beard, but for thehumours which were the terror of all around him. I need not say thathe was loathed and avoided by every one of his neighbours, and that Ihave not heard one single word of sorrow about his terrible end.
"You must have read in the account of the inquest about the man'scabin, Mr. Holmes; but perhaps your friend here has not heard of it.He had built himself a wooden outhouse--he always called it 'thecabin'--a few hundred yards from his house, and it was here that heslept every night. It was a little, single-roomed hut, sixteen feetby ten. He kept the key in his pocket, made his own bed, cleaned ithimself, and allowed no other foot to cross the threshold. There aresmall windows on each side, which were covered by curtains and neveropened. One of these windows was turned towards the high road, andwhen the light burned in it at night the folk used to point it out toeach other and wonder what Black Peter was doing in there. That's thewindow, Mr. Holmes, which gave us one of the few bits of positiveevidence that came out at the inquest.
"You remember that a stonemason, named Slater, walking from ForestRow about one o'clock in the morning--two days before themurder--stopped as he passed the grounds and looked at the square oflight still shining among the trees. He swears that the shadow of aman's head turned sideways was clearly visible on the blind, and thatthis shadow was certainly not that of Peter Carey, whom he knew well.It was that of a bearded man, but the beard was short and bristledforwards in a way very different from that of the captain. So hesays, but he had been two hours in the public-house, and it is somedistance from the road to the window. Besides, this refers to theMonday, and the crime was done upon the Wednesday.
"On the Tuesday Peter Carey was in one of his blackest moods, flushedwith drink and as savage as a dangerous wild beast. He roamed aboutthe house, and the women ran for it when they heard him coming. Latein the evening he went down to his own hut. About two o'clock thefollowing morning his daughter, who slept with her window open, hearda most fearful yell from that direction, but it was no unusual thingfor him to bawl and shout when he was in drink, so no notice wastaken. On rising at seven one of the maids noticed that the door ofthe hut was open, but so great was the terror which the man causedthat it was midday before anyone would venture down to see what hadbecome of him. Peeping into the open door they saw a sight which sentthem flying with white faces into the village. Within an hour I wason the spot and had taken over the case.
"Well, I have fairly steady nerves, as you know, Mr. Holmes, but Igive you my word that I got a shake when I put my head into thatlittle house. It was droning like a harmonium with the flies andbluebottles, and the floor and walls were like a slaughter-house. Hehad called it a cabin, and a cabin it was sure enough, for you wouldhave thought that you were in a ship. There was a bunk at one end, asea-chest, maps and charts, a picture of the Sea Unicorn, a line oflog-books on a shelf, all exactly as one would expect to find it in acaptain's room. And there in the middle of it was the man himself,his face twisted like a lost soul in torment, and his great brindledbeard stuck upwards in his agony. Right through his broad breast asteel harpoon had been driven, and it had sunk deep into the wood ofthe wall behind him. He was pinned like a beetle on a card. Ofcourse, he was quite dead, and had been so from the instant that hehad uttered that last yell of agony.
"I know your methods, sir, and I applied them. Before I permittedanything to be moved I examined most carefully the ground outside,and also the floor of the room. There were no footmarks."
"Meaning that you saw none?"
"I assure you, sir, that there were none."
"My good Hopkins, I have investigated many crimes, but I have neveryet seen one which was committed by a flying creature. As long as thecriminal remains upon two legs so long must there be someindentation, some abrasion, some trifling displacement which can bedetected by the scientific searcher. It is incredible that thisblood-bespattered room contained no trace which could have aided us.I understand, however, from the inquest that there were some objectswhich you failed to overlook?"
The young inspector winced at my companion's ironical comments.
"I was a fool not to call you in at the time, Mr. Holmes. However,that's past praying for now. Yes, there were several objects in theroom which called for special attention. One was the harpoon withwhich the deed was committed. It had been snatched down from a rackon the wall. Two others remained there, and there was a vacant placefor the third. On the stock was engraved 'S.S.. Sea Unicorn, Dundee.'This seemed to establish that the crime had been done in a moment offury, and that the murderer had seized the first weapon which came inhis way. The fact that the crime was committed at two in the morning,and yet Peter Carey was fully dressed, suggested that he had anappointment with the murderer, which is borne out by the fact that abottle of rum and two dirty glasses stood upon the table."
"Yes," said Holmes; "I think that both inferences are permissible.Was there any other spirit but rum in the room?"
"Yes; there was a tantalus containing brandy and whisky on thesea-chest. It is of no importance to us, however, since the decanterswere full, and it had therefore not been used."
"For all that its presence has some significance," said Holmes."However, let us hear some more about the objects which do seem toyou to bear upon the case."
"There was this tobacco-pouch upon the table."
"What part of the table?"
"It lay in the middle. It was of coarse seal-skin--thestraight-haired skin, with a leather thong to bind it. Inside was'P.C.' on the flap. There was half an ounce of strong ship's tobaccoin it."
"Excellent! What more?"
Stanley Hopkins drew from his pocket a drab-covered note-book. Theoutside was rough and worn, the leaves discoloured. On the first pagewere written the initials "J.H.N." and the date "1883." Holmes laidit on the table and examined it in his minute way, while Hopkins andI gazed over each shoulder. On the second page were the printedletters "C.P.R.," and then came several sheets of numbers. Anotherheading was Argentine, another Costa Rica, and another San Paulo,each with pages of signs and figures after it.
"What do you make of these?" asked Holmes.
"They appear to be lists of Stock Exchange securities. I thought that'J.H.N.' were the initials of a broker, and that 'C.P.R.' may havebeen his client."
"Try Canadian Pacific Railway," said Holmes.
Stanley Hopkins swore between his teeth and struck his thigh with hisclenched hand.
"What a fool I have been!" he cried. "Of course, it is as you say.Then 'J.H.N.' are the only initials we have to solve. I have alreadyexamined the old Stock Exchange lists, and I can find no one in 1883either in the House or among the outside brokers whose initialscorrespond with these. Yet I feel that the clue is the most importantone that I hold. You will admit, Mr. Holmes, that there is apossibility that these initials are those of the second person whowas present--in other words, of the murderer. I would also urge thatthe introduction into the case of a document relating to large massesof valuable securities gives us for the first time some indication ofa motive for the crime."
Sherlock Holmes's face showed that he was thoroughly taken aback bythis new development.
"I must admit both your points," said he. "I confess that thisnote-book, which did not appear at the inquest, modifies any viewswhich I may have formed. I had come to a theory of the crime in whichI can find no place for this. Have you endeavoured to trace any ofthe securities here mentioned?"
"Inquiries are now being made at the offices, but I fear that thecomplete register of the stockholders of these South Americanconcerns is in South America, and that some weeks must elapse beforewe can trace the shares."
Holmes had been examining the cover of the note-book with hismagnifying lens.
"Surely there is some discolouration here," said he.
"Yes, sir, it is a blood-stain. I told you that I picked the book offthe floor."
"Was the blood-stain above or below?"
"On the side next the boards."
"Which proves, of course, that the book was dropped after the crimewas committed."
"Exactly, Mr. Holmes. I appreciated that point, and I conjecturedthat it was dropped by the murderer in his hurried flight. It laynear the door."
"I suppose that none of these securities have been found among theproperty of the dead man?"
"No, sir."
"Have you any reason to suspect robbery?"
"No, sir. Nothing seemed to have been touched."
"Dear me, it is certainly a very interesting case. Then there was aknife, was there not?"
"A sheath-knife, still in its sheath. It lay at the feet of the deadman. Mrs. Carey has identified it as being her husband's property."
Holmes was lost in thought for some time.
"Well," said he, at last, "I suppose I shall have to come out andhave a look at it."
Stanley Hopkins gave a cry of joy.
"Thank you, sir. That will indeed be a weight off my mind."
Holmes shook his finger at the inspector.
"It would have been an easier task a week ago," said he. "But evennow my visit may not be entirely fruitless. Watson, if you can sparethe time I should be very glad of your company. If you will call afour-wheeler, Hopkins, we shall be ready to start for Forest Row in aquarter of an hour."
Alighting at the small wayside station, we drove for some milesthrough the remains of widespread woods, which were once part of thatgreat forest which for so long held the Saxon invaders at bay--theimpenetrable "weald," for sixty years the bulwark of Britain. Vastsections of it have been cleared, for this is the seat of the firstiron-works of the country, and the trees have been felled to smeltthe ore. Now the richer fields of the North have absorbed the trade,and nothing save these ravaged groves and great scars in the earthshow the work of the past. Here in a clearing upon the green slope ofa hill stood a long, low stone house, approached by a curving driverunning through the fields. Nearer the road, and surrounded on threesides by bushes, was a small outhouse, one window and the door facingin our direction. It was the scene of the murder.
Stanley Hopkins led us first to the house, where he introduced us toa haggard, grey-haired woman, the widow of the murdered man, whosegaunt and deep-lined face, with the furtive look of terror in thedepths of her red-rimmed eyes, told of the years of hardship andill-usage which she had endured. With her was her daughter, a pale,fair-haired girl, whose eyes blazed defiantly at us as she told usthat she was glad that her father was dead, and that she blessed thehand which had struck him down. It was a terrible household thatBlack Peter Carey had made for himself, and it was with a sense ofrelief that we found ourselves in the sunlight again and making ourway along a path which had been worn across the fields by the feet ofthe dead man.
The outhouse was the simplest of dwellings, wooden-walled,shingle-roofed, one window beside the door and one on the fartherside. Stanley Hopkins drew the key from his pocket, and had stoopedto the lock, when he paused with a look of attention and surpriseupon his face.
"Someone has been tampering with it," he said.
There could be no doubt of the fact. The woodwork was cut and thescratches showed white through the paint, as if they had been thatinstant done. Holmes had been examining the window.
"Someone has tried to force this also. Whoever it was has failed tomake his way in. He must have been a very poor burglar."
"This is a most extraordinary thing," said the inspector; "I couldswear that these marks were not here yesterday evening."
"Some curious person from the village, perhaps," I suggested.
"Very unlikely. Few of them would dare to set foot in the grounds,far less try to force their way into the cabin. What do you think ofit, Mr. Holmes?"
"I think that fortune is very kind to us."
"You mean that the person will come again?"
"It is very probable. He came expecting to find the door open. Hetried to get in with the blade of a very small penknife. He could notmanage it. What would he do?"
"Come again next night with a more useful tool."
"So I should say. It will be our fault if we are not there to receivehim. Meanwhile, let me see the inside of the cabin."
The traces of the tragedy had been removed, but the furniture withinthe little room still stood as it had been on the night of the crime.For two hours, with most intense concentration, Holmes examined everyobject in turn, but his face showed that his quest was not asuccessful one. Once only he paused in his patient investigation.
"Have you taken anything off this shelf, Hopkins?"
"No; I have moved nothing."
"Something has been taken. There is less dust in this corner of theshelf than elsewhere. It may have been a book lying on its side. Itmay have been a box. Well, well, I can do nothing more. Let us walkin these beautiful woods, Watson, and give a few hours to the birdsand the flowers. We shall meet you here later, Hopkins, and see if wecan come to closer quarters with the gentleman who has paid thisvisit in the night."
It was past eleven o'clock when we formed our little ambuscade.Hopkins was for leaving the door of the hut open, but Holmes was ofthe opinion that this would rouse the suspicions of the stranger. Thelock was a perfectly simple one, and only a strong blade was neededto push it back. Holmes also suggested that we should wait, notinside the hut, but outside it among the bushes which grew round thefarther window. In this way we should be able to watch our man if hestruck a light, and see what his object was in this stealthynocturnal visit.
It was a long and melancholy vigil, and yet brought with it somethingof the thrill which the hunter feels when he lies beside the waterpool and waits for the coming of the thirsty beast of prey. Whatsavage creature was it which might steal upon us out of the darkness?Was it a fierce tiger of crime, which could only be taken fightinghard with flashing fang and claw, or would it prove to be someskulking jackal, dangerous only to the weak and unguarded?
In absolute silence we crouched amongst the bushes, waiting forwhatever might come. At first the steps of a few belated villagers,or the sound of voices from the village, lightened our vigil; but oneby one these interruptions died away and an absolute stillness fellupon us, save for the chimes of the distant church, which told us ofthe progress of the night, and for the rustle and whisper of a finerain falling amid the foliage which roofed us in.
Half-past two had chimed, and it was the darkest hour which precedesthe dawn, when we all started as a low but sharp click came from thedirection of the gate. Someone had entered the drive. Again there wasa long silence, and I had begun to fear that it was a false alarm,when a stealthy step was heard upon the other side of the hut, and amoment later a metallic scraping and clinking. The man was trying toforce the lock! This time his skill was greater or his tool wasbetter, for there was a sudden snap and the creak of the hinges. Thena match was struck, and next instant the steady light from a candlefilled the interior of the hut. Through the gauze curtain our eyeswere all riveted upon the scene within.
The nocturnal visitor was a young man, frail and thin, with a blackmoustache which intensified the deadly pallor of his face. He couldnot have been much above twenty years of age. I have never seen anyhuman being who appeared to be in such a pitiable fright, for histeeth were visibly chattering and he was shaking in every limb. Hewas dressed like a gentleman, in Norfolk jacket and knickerbockers,with a cloth cap upon his head. We watched him staring round withfrightened eyes. Then he laid the candle-end upon the table anddisappeared from our view into one of the corners. He returned with alarge book, one of the log-books which formed a line upon theshelves. Leaning on the table he rapidly turned over the leaves ofthis volume until he came to the entry which he sought. Then, with anangry gesture of his clenched hand, he closed the book, replaced itin the corner, and put out the light. He had hardly turned to leavethe hut when Hopkins's hand was on the fellow's collar, and I heardhis loud gasp of terror as he understood that he was taken. Thecandle was re-lit, and there was our wretched captive shivering andcowering in the grasp of the detective. He sank down upon thesea-chest, and looked helplessly from one of us to the other.
"Now, my fine fellow," said Stanley Hopkins, "who are you, and whatdo you want here?"
The man pulled himself together and faced us with an effort atself-composure.
"You are detectives, I suppose?" said he. "You imagine I am connectedwith the death of Captain Peter Carey. I assure you that I aminnocent."
"We'll see about that," said Hopkins. "First of all, what is yourname?"
"It is John Hopley Neligan."
I saw Holmes and Hopkins exchange a quick glance.
"What are you doing here?"
"Can I speak confidentially?"
"No, certainly not."
"Why should I tell you?"
"If you have no answer it may go badly with you at the trial."
The young man winced.
"Well, I will tell you," he said. "Why should I not? And yet I hateto think of this old scandal gaining a new lease of life. Did youever hear of Dawson and Neligan?"
I could see from Hopkins's face that he never had; but Holmes waskeenly interested.
"You mean the West-country bankers," said he. "They failed for amillion, ruined half the county families of Cornwall, and Neligandisappeared."
"Exactly. Neligan was my father."
At last we were getting something positive, and yet it seemed a longgap between an absconding banker and Captain Peter Carey pinnedagainst the wall with one of his own harpoons. We all listenedintently to the young man's words.
"It was my father who was really concerned. Dawson had retired. I wasonly ten years of age at the time, but I was old enough to feel theshame and horror of it all. It has always been said that my fatherstole all the securities and fled. It is not true. It was his beliefthat if he were given time in which to realize them all would be welland every creditor paid in full. He started in his little yacht forNorway just before the warrant was issued for his arrest. I canremember that last night when he bade farewell to my mother. He leftus a list of the securities he was taking, and he swore that he wouldcome back with his honour cleared, and that none who had trusted himwould suffer. Well, no word was ever heard from him again. Both theyacht and he vanished utterly. We believed, my mother and I, that heand it, with the securities that he had taken with him, were at thebottom of the sea. We had a faithful friend, however, who is abusiness man, and it was he who discovered some time ago that some ofthe securities which my father had with him have reappeared on theLondon market. You can imagine our amazement. I spent months intrying to trace them, and at last, after many doublings anddifficulties, I discovered that the original seller had been CaptainPeter Carey, the owner of this hut.
"Naturally, I made some inquiries about the man. I found that he hadbeen in command of a whaler which was due to return from the Arcticseas at the very time when my father was crossing to Norway. Theautumn of that year was a stormy one, and there was a long successionof southerly gales. My father's yacht may well have been blown to thenorth, and there met by Captain Peter Carey's ship. If that were so,what had become of my father? In any case, if I could prove fromPeter Carey's evidence how these securities came on the market itwould be a proof that my father had not sold them, and that he had noview to personal profit when he took them.
"I came down to Sussex with the intention of seeing the captain, butit was at this moment that his terrible death occurred. I read at theinquest a description of his cabin, in which it stated that the oldlog-books of his vessel were preserved in it. It struck me that if Icould see what occurred in the month of August, 1883, on board theSea Unicorn, I might settle the mystery of my father's fate. I triedlast night to get at these log-books, but was unable to open thedoor. To-night I tried again, and succeeded; but I find that thepages which deal with that month have been torn from the book. It wasat that moment I found myself a prisoner in your hands."
"Is that all?" asked Hopkins.
"Yes, that is all." His eyes shifted as he said it.
"You have nothing else to tell us?"
He hesitated.
"No; there is nothing."
"You have not been here before last night?"
"No."
"Then how do you account for that?" cried Hopkins, as he held up thedamning note-book, with the initials of our prisoner on the firstleaf and the blood-stain on the cover.
The wretched man collapsed. He sank his face in his hands andtrembled all over.
"Where did you get it?" he groaned. "I did not know. I thought I hadlost it at the hotel."
"That is enough," said Hopkins, sternly. "Whatever else you have tosay you must say in court. You will walk down with me now to thepolice-station. Well, Mr. Holmes, I am very much obliged to you andto your friend for coming down to help me. As it turns out yourpresence was unnecessary, and I would have brought the case to thissuccessful issue without you; but none the less I am very grateful.Rooms have been reserved for you at the Brambletye Hotel, so we canall walk down to the village together."
"Well, Watson, what do you think of it?" asked Holmes, as wetravelled back next morning.
"I can see that you are not satisfied."
"Oh, yes, my dear Watson, I am perfectly satisfied. At the same timeStanley Hopkins's methods do not commend themselves to me. I amdisappointed in Stanley Hopkins. I had hoped for better things fromhim. One should always look for a possible alternative and provideagainst it. It is the first rule of criminal investigation."
"What, then, is the alternative?"
"The line of investigation which I have myself been pursuing. It maygive us nothing. I cannot tell. But at least I shall follow it to theend."
Several letters were waiting for Holmes at Baker Street. He snatchedone of them up, opened it, and burst out into a triumphant chuckle oflaughter.
"Excellent, Watson. The alternative develops. Have you telegraphforms? Just write a couple of messages for me: 'Sumner, ShippingAgent, Ratcliff Highway. Send three men on, to arrive ten to-morrowmorning.--Basil.' That's my name in those parts. The other is:'Inspector Stanley Hopkins, 46, Lord Street, Brixton. Come breakfastto-morrow at nine-thirty. Important. Wire if unable tocome.--Sherlock Holmes.' There, Watson, this infernal case hashaunted me for ten days. I hereby banish it completely from mypresence. To-morrow I trust that we shall hear the last of it forever."
Sharp at the hour named Inspector Stanley Hopkins appeared, and wesat down together to the excellent breakfast which Mrs. Hudson hadprepared. The young detective was in high spirits at his success.
"You really think that your solution must be correct?" asked Holmes.
"I could not imagine a more complete case."
"It did not seem to me conclusive."
"You astonish me, Mr. Holmes. What more could one ask for?"
"Does your explanation cover every point?"
"Undoubtedly. I find that young Neligan arrived at the BrambletyeHotel on the very day of the crime. He came on the pretence ofplaying golf. His room was on the ground-floor, and he could get outwhen he liked. That very night he went down to Woodman's Lee, sawPeter Carey at the hut, quarrelled with him, and killed him with theharpoon. Then, horrified by what he had done, he fled out of the hut,dropping the note-book which he had brought with him in order toquestion Peter Carey about these different securities. You may haveobserved that some of them were marked with ticks, and theothers--the great majority--were not. Those which are ticked havebeen traced on the London market; but the others presumably werestill in the possession of Carey, and young Neligan, according to hisown account, was anxious to recover them in order to do the rightthing by his father's creditors. After his flight he did not dare toapproach the hut again for some time; but at last he forced himselfto do so in order to obtain the information which he needed. Surelythat is all simple and obvious?"
Holmes smiled and shook his head.
"It seems to me to have only one drawback, Hopkins, and that is thatit is intrinsically impossible. Have you tried to drive a harpoonthrough a body? No? Tut, tut, my dear sir, you must really payattention to these details. My friend Watson could tell you that Ispent a whole morning in that exercise. It is no easy matter, andrequires a strong and practised arm. But this blow was delivered withsuch violence that the head of the weapon sank deep into the wall. Doyou imagine that this anaemic youth was capable of so frightful anassault? Is he the man who hobnobbed in rum and water with BlackPeter in the dead of the night? Was it his profile that was seen onthe blind two nights before? No, no, Hopkins; it is another and amore formidable person for whom we must seek."
The detective's face had grown longer and longer during Holmes'sspeech. His hopes and his ambitions were all crumbling about him. Buthe would not abandon his position without a struggle.
"You can't deny that Neligan was present that night, Mr. Holmes. Thebook will prove that. I fancy that I have evidence enough to satisfya jury, even if you are able to pick a hole in it. Besides, Mr.Holmes, I have laid my hand upon my man. As to this terrible personof yours, where is he?"
"I rather fancy that he is on the stair," said Holmes, serenely. "Ithink, Watson, that you would do well to put that revolver where youcan reach it." He rose, and laid a written paper upon a side-table."Now we are ready," said he.
There had been some talking in gruff voices outside, and now Mrs.Hudson opened the door to say that there were three men inquiring forCaptain Basil.
"Show them in one by one," said Holmes.
The first who entered was a little ribston-pippin of a man, withruddy cheeks and fluffy white side-whiskers. Holmes had drawn aletter from his pocket.
"What name?" he asked.
"James Lancaster."
"I am sorry, Lancaster, but the berth is full. Here is half asovereign for your trouble. Just step into this room and wait therefor a few minutes."
The second man was a long, dried-up creature, with lank hair andsallow cheeks. His name was Hugh Pattins. He also received hisdismissal, his half-sovereign, and the order to wait.
The third applicant was a man of remarkable appearance. A fiercebull-dog face was framed in a tangle of hair and beard, and two bolddark eyes gleamed behind the cover of thick, tufted, overhungeyebrows. He saluted and stood sailor-fashion, turning his cap roundin his hands.
"Your name?" asked Holmes.
"Patrick Cairns."
"Harpooner?"
"Yes, sir. Twenty-six voyages."
"Dundee, I suppose?"
"Yes, sir."
"And ready to start with an exploring ship?"
"Yes, sir."
"What wages?"
"Eight pounds a month."
"Could you start at once?"
"As soon as I get my kit."
"Have you your papers?"
"Yes, sir." He took a sheaf of worn and greasy forms from his pocket.Holmes glanced over them and returned them.
"You are just the man I want," said he. "Here's the agreement on theside-table. If you sign it the whole matter will be settled."
The seaman lurched across the room and took up the pen.
"Shall I sign here?" he asked, stooping over the table.
Holmes leaned over his shoulder and passed both hands over his neck.
"This will do," said he.
I heard a click of steel and a bellow like an enraged bull. The nextinstant Holmes and the seaman were rolling on the ground together. Hewas a man of such gigantic strength that, even with the handcuffswhich Holmes had so deftly fastened upon his wrists, he would havevery quickly overpowered my friend had Hopkins and I not rushed tohis rescue. Only when I pressed the cold muzzle of the revolver tohis temple did he at last understand that resistance was vain. Welashed his ankles with cord and rose breathless from the struggle.
"I must really apologize, Hopkins," said Sherlock Holmes; "I fearthat the scrambled eggs are cold. However, you will enjoy the rest ofyour breakfast all the better, will you not, for the thought that youhave brought your case to a triumphant conclusion."
Stanley Hopkins was speechless with amazement.
"I don't know what to say, Mr. Holmes," he blurted out at last, witha very red face. "It seems to me that I have been making a fool ofmyself from the beginning. I understand now, what I should never haveforgotten, that I am the pupil and you are the master. Even now I seewhat you have done, but I don't know how you did it, or what itsignifies."
"Well, well," said Holmes, good-humouredly. "We all learn byexperience, and your lesson this time is that you should never losesight of the alternative. You were so absorbed in young Neligan thatyou could not spare a thought to Patrick Cairns, the true murderer ofPeter Carey."
The hoarse voice of the seaman broke in on our conversation.
"See here, mister," said he, "I make no complaint of beingman-handled in this fashion, but I would have you call things bytheir right names. You say I murdered Peter Carey; I say I killedPeter Carey, and there's all the difference. Maybe you don't believewhat I say. Maybe you think I am just slinging you a yarn."
"Not at all," said Holmes. "Let us hear what you have to say."
"It's soon told, and, by the Lord, every word of it is truth. I knewBlack Peter, and when he pulled out his knife I whipped a harpoonthrough him sharp, for I knew that it was him or me. That's how hedied. You can call it murder. Anyhow, I'd as soon die with a roperound my neck as with Black Peter's knife in my heart."
"How came you there?" asked Holmes.
"I'll tell it you from the beginning. Just sit me up a little so as Ican speak easy. It was in '83 that it happened--August of that year.Peter Carey was master of the Sea Unicorn, and I was spare harpooner.We were coming out of the ice-pack on our way home, with head windsand a week's southerly gale, when we picked up a little craft thathad been blown north. There was one man on her--a landsman. The crewhad thought she would founder, and had made for the Norwegian coastin the dinghy. I guess they were all drowned. Well, we took him onboard, this man, and he and the skipper had some long talks in thecabin. All the baggage we took off with him was one tin box. So faras I know, the man's name was never mentioned, and on the secondnight he disappeared as if he had never been. It was given out thathe had either thrown himself overboard or fallen overboard in theheavy weather that we were having. Only one man knew what hadhappened to him, and that was me, for with my own eyes I saw theskipper tip up his heels and put him over the rail in the middlewatch of a dark night, two days before we sighted the Shetlandlights.
"Well, I kept my knowledge to myself and waited to see what wouldcome of it. When we got back to Scotland it was easily hushed up, andnobody asked any questions. A stranger died by an accident, and itwas nobody's business to inquire. Shortly after Peter Carey gave upthe sea, and it was long years before I could find where he was. Iguessed that he had done the deed for the sake of what was in thattin box, and that he could afford now to pay me well for keeping mymouth shut.
"I found out where he was through a sailor man that had met him inLondon, and down I went to squeeze him. The first night he wasreasonable enough, and was ready to give me what would make me freeof the sea for life. We were to fix it all two nights later. When Icame I found him three parts drunk and in a vile temper. We sat downand we drank and we yarned about old times, but the more he drank theless I liked the look on his face. I spotted that harpoon upon thewall, and I thought I might need it before I was through. Then atlast he broke out at me, spitting and cursing, with murder in hiseyes and a great clasp-knife in his hand. He had not time to get itfrom the sheath before I had the harpoon through him. Heavens! what ayell he gave; and his face gets between me and my sleep! I stoodthere, with his blood splashing round me, and I waited for a bit; butall was quiet, so I took heart once more. I looked round, and therewas the tin box on a shelf. I had as much right to it as Peter Carey,anyhow, so I took it with me and left the hut. Like a fool I left mybaccy-pouch upon the table.
"Now I'll tell you the queerest part of the whole story. I had hardlygot outside the hut when I heard someone coming, and I hid among thebushes. A man came slinking along, went into the hut, gave a cry asif he had seen a ghost, and legged it as hard as he could run untilhe was out of sight. Who he was or what he wanted is more than I cantell. For my part I walked ten miles, got a train at Tunbridge Wells,and so reached London, and no one the wiser.
"Well, when I came to examine the box I found there was no money init, and nothing but papers that I would not dare to sell. I had lostmy hold on Black Peter, and was stranded in London without ashilling. There was only my trade left. I saw these advertisementsabout harpooners and high wages, so I went to the shipping agents,and they sent me here. That's all I know, and I say again that if Ikilled Black Peter the law should give me thanks, for I saved themthe price of a hempen rope."
"A very clear statement," said Holmes, rising and lighting his pipe."I think, Hopkins, that you should lose no time in conveying yourprisoner to a place of safety. This room is not well adapted for acell, and Mr. Patrick Cairns occupies too large a proportion of ourcarpet."
"Mr. Holmes," said Hopkins, "I do not know how to express mygratitude. Even now I do not understand how you attained thisresult."
"Simply by having the good fortune to get the right clue from thebeginning. It is very possible if I had known about this note-book itmight have led away my thoughts, as it did yours. But all I heardpointed in the one direction. The amazing strength, the skill in theuse of the harpoon, the rum and water, the seal-skin tobacco-pouch,with the coarse tobacco--all these pointed to a seaman, and one whohad been a whaler. I was convinced that the initials 'P.C.' upon thepouch were a coincidence, and not those of Peter Carey, since heseldom smoked, and no pipe was found in his cabin. You remember thatI asked whether whisky and brandy were in the cabin. You said theywere. How many landsmen are there who would drink rum when they couldget these other spirits? Yes, I was certain it was a seaman."
"And how did you find him?"
"My dear sir, the problem had become a very simple one. If it were aseaman, it could only be a seaman who had been with him on the SeaUnicorn. So far as I could learn he had sailed in no other ship. Ispent three days in wiring to Dundee, and at the end of that time Ihad ascertained the names of the crew of the Sea Unicorn in 1883.When I found Patrick Cairns among the harpooners my research wasnearing its end. I argued that the man was probably in London, andthat he would desire to leave the country for a time. I thereforespent some days in the East-end, devised an Arctic expedition, putforth tempting terms for harpooners who would serve under CaptainBasil--and behold the result!"
"Wonderful!" cried Hopkins. "Wonderful!"
"You must obtain the release of young Neligan as soon as possible,"said Holmes. "I confess that I think you owe him some apology. Thetin box must be returned to him, but, of course, the securities whichPeter Carey has sold are lost for ever. There's the cab, Hopkins, andyou can remove your man. If you want me for the trial, my address andthat of Watson will be somewhere in Norway--I'll send particularslater."





              THE ADVENTURE OF CHARLES AUGUSTUS MILVERTON
It is years since the incidents of which I speak took place, and yetit is with diffidence that I allude to them. For a long time, evenwith the utmost discretion and reticence, it would have beenimpossible to make the facts public; but now the principal personconcerned is beyond the reach of human law, and with due suppressionthe story may be told in such fashion as to injure no one. It recordsan absolutely unique experience in the career both of Mr. SherlockHolmes and of myself. The reader will excuse me if I conceal the dateor any other fact by which he might trace the actual occurrence.
We had been out for one of our evening rambles, Holmes and I, and hadreturned about six o'clock on a cold, frosty winter's evening. AsHolmes turned up the lamp the light fell upon a card on the table. Heglanced at it, and then, with an ejaculation of disgust, threw it onthe floor. I picked it up and read:--
                                                           Charles Augustus Milverton,                                                                Appledore Towers,                                                                   Hampstead.                                                                     Agent.                                    
"Who is he?" I asked.
"The worst man in London," Holmes answered, as he sat down andstretched his legs before the fire. "Is anything on the back of thecard?"
I turned it over.
"Will call at 6.30--C.A.M.," I read.
"Hum! He's about due. Do you feel a creeping, shrinking sensation,Watson, when you stand before the serpents in the Zoo and see theslithery, gliding, venomous creatures, with their deadly eyes andwicked, flattened faces? Well, that's how Milverton impresses me.I've had to do with fifty murderers in my career, but the worst ofthem never gave me the repulsion which I have for this fellow. Andyet I can't get out of doing business with him--indeed, he is here atmy invitation."
"But who is he?"
"I'll tell you, Watson. He is the king of all the blackmailers.Heaven help the man, and still more the woman, whose secret andreputation come into the power of Milverton. With a smiling face anda heart of marble he will squeeze and squeeze until he has drainedthem dry. The fellow is a genius in his way, and would have made hismark in some more savoury trade. His method is as follows: He allowsit to be known that he is prepared to pay very high sums for letterswhich compromise people of wealth or position. He receives thesewares not only from treacherous valets or maids, but frequently fromgenteel ruffians who have gained the confidence and affection oftrusting women. He deals with no niggard hand. I happen to know thathe paid seven hundred pounds to a footman for a note two lines inlength, and that the ruin of a noble family was the result.Everything which is in the market goes to Milverton, and there arehundreds in this great city who turn white at his name. No one knowswhere his grip may fall, for he is far too rich and far too cunningto work from hand to mouth. He will hold a card back for years inorder to play it at the moment when the stake is best worth winning.I have said that he is the worst man in London, and I would ask youhow could one compare the ruffian who in hot blood bludgeons his matewith this man, who methodically and at his leisure tortures the souland wrings the nerves in order to add to his already swollenmoney-bags?"
I had seldom heard my friend speak with such intensity of feeling.
"But surely," said I, "the fellow must be within the grasp of thelaw?"
"Technically, no doubt, but practically not. What would it profit awoman, for example, to get him a few months' imprisonment if her ownruin must immediately follow? His victims dare not hit back. If everhe blackmailed an innocent person, then, indeed, we should have him;but he is as cunning as the Evil One. No, no; we must find other waysto fight him."
"And why is he here?"
"Because an illustrious client has placed her piteous case in myhands. It is the Lady Eva Brackwell, the most beautiful debutante oflast season. She is to be married in a fortnight to the Earl ofDovercourt. This fiend has several imprudent letters--imprudent,Watson, nothing worse--which were written to an impecunious youngsquire in the country. They would suffice to break off the match.Milverton will send the letters to the Earl unless a large sum ofmoney is paid him. I have been commissioned to meet him, and--to makethe best terms I can."
At that instant there was a clatter and a rattle in the street below.Looking down I saw a stately carriage and pair, the brilliant lampsgleaming on the glossy haunches of the noble chestnuts. A footmanopened the door, and a small, stout man in a shaggy astrachanovercoat descended. A minute later he was in the room.
Charles Augustus Milverton was a man of fifty, with a large,intellectual head, a round, plump, hairless face, a perpetual frozensmile, and two keen grey eyes, which gleamed brightly from behindbroad, golden-rimmed glasses. There was something of Mr. Pickwick'sbenevolence in his appearance, marred only by the insincerity of thefixed smile and by the hard glitter of those restless and penetratingeyes. His voice was as smooth and suave as his countenance, as headvanced with a plump little hand extended, murmuring his regret forhaving missed us at his first visit. Holmes disregarded theoutstretched hand and looked at him with a face of granite.Milverton's smile broadened; he shrugged his shoulders, removed hisovercoat, folded it with great deliberation over the back of a chair,and then took a seat.
"This gentleman?" said he, with a wave in my direction. "Is itdiscreet? Is it right?"
"Dr. Watson is my friend and partner."
"Very good, Mr. Holmes. It is only in your client's interests that Iprotested. The matter is so very delicate--"
"Dr. Watson has already heard of it."
"Then we can proceed to business. You say that you are acting forLady Eva. Has she empowered you to accept my terms?"
"What are your terms?"
"Seven thousand pounds."
"And the alternative?"
"My dear sir, it is painful for me to discuss it; but if the money isnot paid on the 14th there certainly will be no marriage on the18th." His insufferable smile was more complacent than ever.
Holmes thought for a little.
"You appear to me," he said, at last, "to be taking matters too muchfor granted. I am, of course, familiar with the contents of theseletters. My client will certainly do what I may advise. I shallcounsel her to tell her future husband the whole story and to trustto his generosity."
Milverton chuckled.
"You evidently do not know the Earl," said he.
From the baffled look upon Holmes's face I could see clearly that hedid.
"What harm is there in the letters?" he asked.
"They are sprightly--very sprightly," Milverton answered. "The ladywas a charming correspondent. But I can assure you that the Earl ofDovercourt would fail to appreciate them. However, since you thinkotherwise, we will let it rest at that. It is purely a matter ofbusiness. If you think that it is in the best interests of yourclient that these letters should be placed in the hands of the Earl,then you would indeed be foolish to pay so large a sum of money toregain them." He rose and seized his astrachan coat.
Holmes was grey with anger and mortification.
"Wait a little," he said. "You go too fast. We would certainly makeevery effort to avoid scandal in so delicate a matter."
Milverton relapsed into his chair.
"I was sure that you would see it in that light," he purred.
"At the same time," Holmes continued, "Lady Eva is not a wealthywoman. I assure you that two thousand pounds would be a drain uponher resources, and that the sum you name is utterly beyond her power.I beg, therefore, that you will moderate your demands, and that youwill return the letters at the price I indicate, which is, I assureyou, the highest that you can get."
Milverton's smile broadened and his eyes twinkled humorously.
"I am aware that what you say is true about the lady's resources,"said he. "At the same time, you must admit that the occasion of alady's marriage is a very suitable time for her friends and relativesto make some little effort upon her behalf. They may hesitate as toan acceptable wedding present. Let me assure them that this littlebundle of letters would give more joy than all the candelabra andbutter-dishes in London."
"It is impossible," said Holmes.
"Dear me, dear me, how unfortunate!" cried Milverton, taking out abulky pocket-book. "I cannot help thinking that ladies areill-advised in not making an effort. Look at this!" He held up alittle note with a coat-of-arms upon the envelope. "That belongsto--well, perhaps it is hardly fair to tell the name until to-morrowmorning. But at that time it will be in the hands of the lady'shusband. And all because she will not find a beggarly sum which shecould get by turning her diamonds into paste. It is such a pity. Now,you remember the sudden end of the engagement between the HonourableMiss Miles and Colonel Dorking? Only two days before the weddingthere was a paragraph in the Morning Post to say that it was all off.And why? It is almost incredible, but the absurd sum of twelvehundred pounds would have settled the whole question. Is it notpitiful? And here I find you, a man of sense, boggling about termswhen your client's future and honour are at stake. You surprise me,Mr. Holmes."
"What I say is true," Holmes answered. "The money cannot be found.Surely it is better for you to take the substantial sum which I offerthan to ruin this woman's career, which can profit you in no way?"
"There you make a mistake, Mr. Holmes. An exposure would profit meindirectly to a considerable extent. I have eight or ten similarcases maturing. If it was circulated among them that I had made asevere example of the Lady Eva I should find all of them much moreopen to reason. You see my point?"
Holmes sprang from his chair.
"Get behind him, Watson! Don't let him out! Now, sir, let us see thecontents of that note-book."
Milverton had glided as quick as a rat to the side of the room, andstood with his back against the wall.
"Mr. Holmes, Mr. Holmes," he said, turning the front of his coat andexhibiting the butt of a large revolver, which projected from theinside pocket. "I have been expecting you to do something original.This has been done so often, and what good has ever come from it? Iassure you that I am armed to the teeth, and I am perfectly preparedto use my weapons, knowing that the law will support me. Besides,your supposition that I would bring the letters here in a note-bookis entirely mistaken. I would do nothing so foolish. And now,gentlemen, I have one or two little interviews this evening, and itis a long drive to Hampstead." He stepped forward, took up his coat,laid his hand on his revolver, and turned to the door. I picked up achair, but Holmes shook his head and I laid it down again. With bow,a smile, and a twinkle Milverton was out of the room, and a fewmoments after we heard the slam of the carriage door and the rattleof the wheels as he drove away.
Holmes sat motionless by the fire, his hands buried deep in histrouser pockets, his chin sunk upon his breast, his eyes fixed uponthe glowing embers. For half an hour he was silent and still. Then,with the gesture of a man who has taken his decision, he sprang tohis feet and passed into his bedroom. A little later a rakish youngworkman with a goatee beard and a swagger lit his clay pipe at thelamp before descending into the street. "I'll be back some time,Watson," said he, and vanished into the night. I understood that hehad opened his campaign against Charles Augustus Milverton; but Ilittle dreamed the strange shape which that campaign was destined totake.
For some days Holmes came and went at all hours in this attire, butbeyond a remark that his time was spent at Hampstead, and that it wasnot wasted, I knew nothing of what he was doing. At last, however, ona wild, tempestuous evening, when the wind screamed and rattledagainst the windows, he returned from his last expedition, and havingremoved his disguise he sat before the fire and laughed heartily inhis silent inward fashion.
"You would not call me a marrying man, Watson?"
"No, indeed!"
"You'll be interested to hear that I am engaged."
"My dear fellow! I congrat--"
"To Milverton's housemaid."
"Good heavens, Holmes!"
"I wanted information, Watson."
"Surely you have gone too far?"
"It was a most necessary step. I am a plumber with a rising business,Escott by name. I have walked out with her each evening, and I havetalked with her. Good heavens, those talks! However, I have got all Iwanted. I know Milverton's house as I know the palm of my hand."
"But the girl, Holmes?"
He shrugged his shoulders.
"You can't help it, my dear Watson. You must play your cards as bestyou can when such a stake is on the table. However, I rejoice to saythat I have a hated rival who will certainly cut me out the instantthat my back is turned. What a splendid night it is!"
"You like this weather?"
"It suits my purpose. Watson, I mean to burgle Milverton's houseto-night."
I had a catching of the breath, and my skin went cold at the words,which were slowly uttered in a tone of concentrated resolution. As aflash of lightning in the night shows up in an instant every detailof a wide landscape, so at one glance I seemed to see every possibleresult of such an action--the detection, the capture, the honouredcareer ending in irreparable failure and disgrace, my friend himselflying at the mercy of the odious Milverton.
"For Heaven's sake, Holmes, think what you are doing," I cried.
"My dear fellow, I have given it every consideration. I am neverprecipitate in my actions, nor would I adopt so energetic and indeedso dangerous a course if any other were possible. Let us look at thematter clearly and fairly. I suppose that you will admit that theaction is morally justifiable, though technically criminal. To burglehis house is no more than to forcibly take his pocket-book--an actionin which you were prepared to aid me."
I turned it over in my mind.
"Yes," I said; "it is morally justifiable so long as our object is totake no articles save those which are used for an illegal purpose."
"Exactly. Since it is morally justifiable I have only to consider thequestion of personal risk. Surely a gentleman should not lay muchstress upon this when a lady is in most desperate need of his help?"
"You will be in such a false position."
"Well, that is part of the risk. There is no other possible way ofregaining these letters. The unfortunate lady has not the money, andthere are none of her people in whom she could confide. To-morrow isthe last day of grace, and unless we can get the letters to-nightthis villain will be as good as his word and will bring about herruin. I must, therefore, abandon my client to her fate or I must playthis last card. Between ourselves, Watson, it's a sporting duelbetween this fellow Milverton and me. He had, as you saw, the best ofthe first exchanges; but my self-respect and my reputation areconcerned to fight it to a finish."
"Well, I don't like it; but I suppose it must be," said I. "When dowe start?"
"You are not coming."
"Then you are not going," said I. "I give you my word of honour--andI never broke it in my life--that I will take a cab straight to thepolice-station and give you away unless you let me share thisadventure with you."
"You can't help me."
"How do you know that? You can't tell what may happen. Anyway, myresolution is taken. Other people beside you have self-respect andeven reputations."
Holmes had looked annoyed, but his brow cleared, and he clapped me onthe shoulder.
"Well, well, my dear fellow, be it so. We have shared the same roomfor some years, and it would be amusing if we ended by sharing thesame cell. You know, Watson, I don't mind confessing to you that Ihave always had an idea that I would have made a highly efficientcriminal. This is the chance of my lifetime in that direction. Seehere!" He took a neat little leather case out of a drawer, andopening it he exhibited a number of shining instruments. "This is afirst-class, up-to-date burgling kit, with nickel-plated jemmy,diamond-tipped glass-cutter, adaptable keys, and every modernimprovement which the march of civilization demands. Here, too, is mydark lantern. Everything is in order. Have you a pair of silentshoes?"
"I have rubber-soled tennis shoes."
"Excellent. And a mask?"
"I can make a couple out of black silk."
"I can see that you have a strong natural turn for this sort ofthing. Very good; do you make the masks. We shall have some coldsupper before we start. It is now nine-thirty. At eleven we shalldrive as far as Church Row. It is a quarter of an hour's walk fromthere to Appledore Towers. We shall be at work before midnight.Milverton is a heavy sleeper and retires punctually at ten-thirty.With any luck we should be back here by two, with the Lady Eva'sletters in my pocket."
Holmes and I put on our dress-clothes, so that we might appear to betwo theatre-goers homeward bound. In Oxford Street we picked up ahansom and drove to an address in Hampstead. Here we paid off ourcab, and with our great-coats buttoned up, for it was bitterly coldand the wind seemed to blow through us, we walked along the edge ofthe Heath.
"It's a business that needs delicate treatment," said Holmes. "Thesedocuments are contained in a safe in the fellow's study, and thestudy is the ante-room of his bed-chamber. On the other hand, likeall these stout, little men who do themselves well, he is a plethoricsleeper. Agatha--that's my fiancee--says it is a joke in theservants' hall that it's impossible to wake the master. He has asecretary who is devoted to his interests and never budges from thestudy all day. That's why we are going at night. Then he has a beastof a dog which roams the garden. I met Agatha late the last twoevenings, and she locks the brute up so as to give me a clear run.This is the house, this big one in its own grounds. Through thegate--now to the right among the laurels. We might put on our maskshere, I think. You see, there is not a glimmer of light in any of thewindows, and everything is working splendidly."
With our black silk face-coverings, which turned us into two of themost truculent figures in London, we stole up to the silent, gloomyhouse. A sort of tiled veranda extended along one side of it, linedby several windows and two doors.
"That's his bedroom," Holmes whispered. "This door opens straightinto the study. It would suit us best, but it is bolted as well aslocked, and we should make too much noise getting in. Come roundhere. There's a greenhouse which opens into the drawing-room."
The place was locked, but Holmes removed a circle of glass and turnedthe key from the inside. An instant afterwards he had closed the doorbehind us, and we had become felons in the eyes of the law. Thethick, warm air of the conservatory and the rich, choking fragranceof exotic plants took us by the throat. He seized my hand in thedarkness and led me swiftly past banks of shrubs which brushedagainst our faces. Holmes had remarkable powers, carefullycultivated, of seeing in the dark. Still holding my hand in one ofhis he opened a door, and I was vaguely conscious that we had entereda large room in which a cigar had been smoked not long before. Hefelt his way among the furniture, opened another door, and closed itbehind us. Putting out my hand I felt several coats hanging from thewall, and I understood that I was in a passage. We passed along it,and Holmes very gently opened a door upon the right-hand side.Something rushed out at us and my heart sprang into my mouth, but Icould have laughed when I realized that it was the cat. A fire wasburning in this new room, and again the air was heavy with tobaccosmoke. Holmes entered on tiptoe, waited for me to follow, and thenvery gently closed the door. We were in Milverton's study, and aportiere at the farther side showed the entrance to his bedroom.
It was a good fire, and the room was illuminated by it. Near the doorI saw the gleam of an electric switch, but it was unnecessary, evenif it had been safe, to turn it on. At one side of the fireplace wasa heavy curtain, which covered the bay window we had seen fromoutside. On the other side was the door which communicated with theveranda. A desk stood in the centre, with a turning chair of shiningred leather. Opposite was a large bookcase, with a marble bust ofAthene on the top. In the corner between the bookcase and the wallthere stood a tall green safe, the firelight flashing back from thepolished brass knobs upon its face. Holmes stole across and looked atit. Then he crept to the door of the bedroom, and stood with slantinghead listening intently. No sound came from within. Meanwhile it hadstruck me that it would be wise to secure our retreat through theouter door, so I examined it. To my amazement it was neither lockednor bolted! I touched Holmes on the arm, and he turned his maskedface in that direction. I saw him start, and he was evidently assurprised as I.
"I don't like it," he whispered, putting his lips to my very ear. "Ican't quite make it out. Anyhow, we have no time to lose."
"Can I do anything?"
"Yes; stand by the door. If you hear anyone come, bolt it on theinside, and we can get away as we came. If they come the other way,we can get through the door if our job is done, or hide behind thesewindow curtains if it is not. Do you understand?"
I nodded and stood by the door. My first feeling of fear had passedaway, and I thrilled now with a keener zest than I had ever enjoyedwhen we were the defenders of the law instead of its defiers. Thehigh object of our mission, the consciousness that it was unselfishand chivalrous, the villainous character of our opponent, all addedto the sporting interest of the adventure. Far from feeling guilty, Irejoiced and exulted in our dangers. With a glow of admiration Iwatched Holmes unrolling his case of instruments and choosing histool with the calm, scientific accuracy of a surgeon who performs adelicate operation. I knew that the opening of safes was a particularhobby with him, and I understood the joy which it gave him to beconfronted with this green and gold monster, the dragon which held inits maw the reputations of many fair ladies. Turning up the cuffs ofhis dress-coat--he had placed his overcoat on a chair--Holmes laidout two drills, a jemmy, and several skeleton keys. I stood at thecentre door with my eyes glancing at each of the others, ready forany emergency; though, indeed, my plans were somewhat vague as towhat I should do if we were interrupted. For half an hour Holmesworked with concentrated energy, laying down one tool, picking upanother, handling each with the strength and delicacy of the trainedmechanic. Finally I heard a click, the broad green door swung open,and inside I had a glimpse of a number of paper packets, each tied,sealed, and inscribed. Holmes picked one out, but it was hard to readby the flickering fire, and he drew out his little dark lantern, forit was too dangerous, with Milverton in the next room, to switch onthe electric light. Suddenly I saw him halt, listen intently, andthen in an instant he had swung the door of the safe to, picked uphis coat, stuffed his tools into the pockets, and darted behind thewindow curtain, motioning me to do the same.
It was only when I had joined him there that I heard what had alarmedhis quicker senses. There was a noise somewhere within the house. Adoor slammed in the distance. Then a confused, dull murmur brokeitself into the measured thud of heavy footsteps rapidly approaching.They were in the passage outside the room. They paused at the door.The door opened. There was a sharp snick as the electric light wasturned on. The door closed once more, and the pungent reek of astrong cigar was borne to our nostrils. Then the footsteps continuedbackwards and forwards, backwards and forwards, within a few yards ofus. Finally, there was a creak from a chair, and the footstepsceased. Then a key clicked in a lock and I heard the rustle ofpapers.
So far I had not dared to look out, but now I gently parted thedivision of the curtains in front of me and peeped through. From thepressure of Holmes's shoulder against mine I knew that he was sharingmy observations. Right in front of us, and almost within our reach,was the broad, rounded back of Milverton. It was evident that we hadentirely miscalculated his movements, that he had never been to hisbedroom, but that he had been sitting up in some smoking or billiardroom in the farther wing of the house, the windows of which we hadnot seen. His broad, grizzled head, with its shining patch ofbaldness, was in the immediate foreground of our vision. He wasleaning far back in the red leather chair, his legs outstretched, along black cigar projecting at an angle from his mouth. He wore asemi-military smoking jacket, claret-coloured, with a black velvetcollar. In his hand he held a long legal document, which he wasreading in an indolent fashion, blowing rings of tobacco smoke fromhis lips as he did so. There was no promise of a speedy departure inhis composed bearing and his comfortable attitude.
I felt Holmes's hand steal into mine and give me a reassuring shake,as if to say that the situation was within his powers and that he waseasy in his mind. I was not sure whether he had seen what was onlytoo obvious from my position, that the door of the safe wasimperfectly closed, and that Milverton might at any moment observeit. In my own mind I had determined that if I were sure, from therigidity of his gaze, that it had caught his eye, I would at oncespring out, throw my great-coat over his head, pinion him, and leavethe rest to Holmes. But Milverton never looked up. He was languidlyinterested by the papers in his hand, and page after page was turnedas he followed the argument of the lawyer. At least, I thought, whenhe has finished the document and the cigar he will go to his room;but before he had reached the end of either there came a remarkabledevelopment which turned our thoughts into quite another channel.
Several times I had observed that Milverton looked at his watch, andonce he had risen and sat down again, with a gesture of impatience.The idea, however, that he might have an appointment at so strange anhour never occurred to me until a faint sound reached my ears fromthe veranda outside. Milverton dropped his papers and sat rigid inhis chair. The sound was repeated, and then there came a gentle tapat the door. Milverton rose and opened it.
"Well," said he, curtly, "you are nearly half an hour late."
So this was the explanation of the unlocked door and of the nocturnalvigil of Milverton. There was the gentle rustle of a woman's dress. Ihad closed the slit between the curtains as Milverton's face hadturned in our direction, but now I ventured very carefully to open itonce more. He had resumed his seat, the cigar still projecting at aninsolent angle from the corner of his mouth. In front of him, in thefull glare of the electric light, there stood a tall, slim, darkwoman, a veil over her face, a mantle drawn round her chin. Herbreath came quick and fast, and every inch of the lithe figure wasquivering with strong emotion.
"Well," said Milverton, "you've made me lose a good night's rest, mydear. I hope you'll prove worth it. You couldn't come any othertime--eh?"
The woman shook her head.
"Well, if you couldn't you couldn't. If the Countess is a hardmistress you have your chance to get level with her now. Bless thegirl, what are you shivering about? That's right! Pull yourselftogether! Now, let us get down to business." He took a note from thedrawer of his desk. "You say that you have five letters whichcompromise the Countess d'Albert. You want to sell them. I want tobuy them. So far so good. It only remains to fix a price. I shouldwant to inspect the letters, of course. If they are really goodspecimens--Great heavens, is it you?"
The woman without a word had raised her veil and dropped the mantlefrom her chin. It was a dark, handsome, clear-cut face whichconfronted Milverton, a face with a curved nose, strong, darkeyebrows shading hard, glittering eyes, and a straight, thin-lippedmouth set in a dangerous smile.
"It is I," she said; "the woman whose life you have ruined."
Milverton laughed, but fear vibrated in his voice. "You were so veryobstinate," said he. "Why did you drive me to such extremities? Iassure you I wouldn't hurt a fly of my own accord, but every man hashis business, and what was I to do? I put the price well within yourmeans. You would not pay."
"So you sent the letters to my husband, and he--the noblest gentlemanthat ever lived, a man whose boots I was never worthy to lace--hebroke his gallant heart and died. You remember that last night when Icame through that door I begged and prayed you for mercy, and youlaughed in my face as you are trying to laugh now, only your cowardheart cannot keep your lips from twitching? Yes, you never thought tosee me here again, but it was that night which taught me how I couldmeet you face to face, and alone. Well, Charles Milverton, what haveyou to say?"
"Don't imagine that you can bully me," said he, rising to his feet."I have only to raise my voice, and I could call my servants and haveyou arrested. But I will make allowance for your natural anger. Leavethe room at once as you came, and I will say no more."
The woman stood with her hand buried in her bosom, and the samedeadly smile on her thin lips.
"You will ruin no more lives as you ruined mine. You will wring nomore hearts as you wrung mine. I will free the world of a poisonousthing. Take that, you hound, and that!--and that!--and that!"
She had drawn a little, gleaming revolver, and emptied barrel afterbarrel into Milverton's body, the muzzle within two feet of his shirtfront. He shrank away and then fell forward upon the table, coughingfuriously and clawing among the papers. Then he staggered to hisfeet, received another shot, and rolled upon the floor. "You've doneme," he cried, and lay still. The woman looked at him intently andground her heel into his upturned face. She looked again, but therewas no sound or movement. I heard a sharp rustle, the night air blewinto the heated room, and the avenger was gone.
No interference upon our part could have saved the man from his fate;but as the woman poured bullet after bullet into Milverton'sshrinking body I was about to spring out, when I felt Holmes's cold,strong grasp upon my wrist. I understood the whole argument of thatfirm, restraining grip--that it was no affair of ours; that justicehad overtaken a villain; that we had our own duties and our ownobjects which were not to be lost sight of. But hardly had the womanrushed from the room when Holmes, with swift, silent steps, was overat the other door. He turned the key in the lock. At the same instantwe heard voices in the house and the sound of hurrying feet. Therevolver shots had roused the household. With perfect coolness Holmesslipped across to the safe, filled his two arms with bundles ofletters, and poured them all into the fire. Again and again he didit, until the safe was empty. Someone turned the handle and beat uponthe outside of the door. Holmes looked swiftly round. The letterwhich had been the messenger of death for Milverton lay, all mottledwith his blood, upon the table. Holmes tossed it in among the blazingpapers. Then he drew the key from the outer door, passed throughafter me, and locked it on the outside. "This way, Watson," said he;"we can scale the garden wall in this direction."
I could not have believed that an alarm could have spread so swiftly.Looking back, the huge house was one blaze of light. The front doorwas open, and figures were rushing down the drive. The whole gardenwas alive with people, and one fellow raised a view-halloa as weemerged from the veranda and followed hard at our heels. Holmesseemed to know the ground perfectly, and he threaded his way swiftlyamong a plantation of small trees, I close at his heels, and ourforemost pursuer panting behind us. It was a six-foot wall whichbarred our path, but he sprang to the top and over. As I did the sameI felt the hand of the man behind me grab at my ankle; but I kickedmyself free and scrambled over a glass-strewn coping. I fell upon myface among some bushes; but Holmes had me on my feet in an instant,and together we dashed away across the huge expanse of HampsteadHeath. We had run two miles, I suppose, before Holmes at last haltedand listened intently. All was absolute silence behind us. We hadshaken off our pursuers and were safe.
We had breakfasted and were smoking our morning pipe on the day afterthe remarkable experience which I have recorded when Mr. Lestrade, ofScotland Yard, very solemn and impressive, was ushered into ourmodest sitting-room.
"Good morning, Mr. Holmes," said he; "good morning. May I ask if youare very busy just now?"
"Not too busy to listen to you."
"I thought that, perhaps, if you had nothing particular on hand, youmight care to assist us in a most remarkable case which occurred onlylast night at Hampstead."
"Dear me!" said Holmes. "What was that?"
"A murder--a most dramatic and remarkable murder. I know how keen youare upon these things, and I would take it as a great favour if youwould step down to Appledore Towers and give us the benefit of youradvice. It is no ordinary crime. We have had our eyes upon this Mr.Milverton for some time, and, between ourselves, he was a bit of avillain. He is known to have held papers which he used forblackmailing purposes. These papers have all been burned by themurderers. No article of value was taken, as it is probable that thecriminals were men of good position, whose sole object was to preventsocial exposure."
"Criminals!" said Holmes. "Plural!"
"Yes, there were two of them. They were, as nearly as possible,captured red-handed. We have their foot-marks, we have theirdescription; it's ten to one that we trace them. The first fellow wasa bit too active, but the second was caught by the under-gardener andonly got away after a struggle. He was a middle-sized, strongly-builtman--square jaw, thick neck, moustache, a mask over his eyes."
"That's rather vague," said Sherlock Holmes. "Why, it might be adescription of Watson!"
"It's true," said the inspector, with much amusement. "It might be adescription of Watson."
"Well, I am afraid I can't help you, Lestrade," said Holmes. "Thefact is that I knew this fellow Milverton, that I considered him oneof the most dangerous men in London, and that I think there arecertain crimes which the law cannot touch, and which therefore, tosome extent, justify private revenge. No, it's no use arguing. I havemade up my mind. My sympathies are with the criminals rather thanwith the victim, and I will not handle this case."
Holmes had not said one word to me about the tragedy which we hadwitnessed, but I observed all the morning that he was in his mostthoughtful mood, and he gave me the impression, from his vacant eyesand his abstracted manner, of a man who is striving to recallsomething to his memory. We were in the middle of our lunch when hesuddenly sprang to his feet. "By Jove, Watson; I've got it!" hecried. "Take your hat! Come with me!" He hurried at his top speeddown Baker Street and along Oxford Street, until we had almostreached Regent Circus. Here on the left hand there stands a shopwindow filled with photographs of the celebrities and beauties of theday. Holmes's eyes fixed themselves upon one of them, and followinghis gaze I saw the picture of a regal and stately lady in Courtdress, with a high diamond tiara upon her noble head. I looked atthat delicately-curved nose, at the marked eyebrows, at the straightmouth, and the strong little chin beneath it. Then I caught my breathas I read the time-honoured title of the great nobleman and statesmanwhose wife she had been. My eyes met those of Holmes, and he put hisfinger to his lips as we turned away from the window.





                  THE ADVENTURE OF THE SIX NAPOLEONS
It was no very unusual thing for Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, tolook in upon us of an evening, and his visits were welcome toSherlock Holmes, for they enabled him to keep in touch with all thatwas going on at the police head-quarters. In return for the newswhich Lestrade would bring, Holmes was always ready to listen withattention to the details of any case upon which the detective wasengaged, and was able occasionally, without any active interference,to give some hint or suggestion drawn from his own vast knowledge andexperience.
On this particular evening Lestrade had spoken of the weather and thenewspapers. Then he had fallen silent, puffing thoughtfully at hiscigar. Holmes looked keenly at him.
"Anything remarkable on hand?" he asked.
"Oh, no, Mr. Holmes, nothing very particular."
"Then tell me about it."
Lestrade laughed.
"Well, Mr. Holmes, there is no use denying that there is something onmy mind. And yet it is such an absurd business that I hesitated tobother you about it. On the other hand, although it is trivial, it isundoubtedly queer, and I know that you have a taste for all that isout of the common. But in my opinion it comes more in Dr. Watson'sline than ours."
"Disease?" said I.
"Madness, anyhow. And a queer madness too! You wouldn't think therewas anyone living at this time of day who had such a hatred ofNapoleon the First that he would break any image of him that he couldsee."
Holmes sank back in his chair.
"That's no business of mine," said he.
"Exactly. That's what I said. But then, when the man commits burglaryin order to break images which are not his own, that brings it awayfrom the doctor and on to the policeman."
Holmes sat up again.
"Burglary! This is more interesting. Let me hear the details."
Lestrade took out his official note-book and refreshed his memoryfrom its pages.
"The first case reported was four days ago," said he. "It was at theshop of Morse Hudson, who has a place for the sale of pictures andstatues in the Kennington Road. The assistant had left the front shopfor an instant when he heard a crash, and hurrying in he found aplaster bust of Napoleon, which stood with several other works of artupon the counter, lying shivered into fragments. He rushed out intothe road, but, although several passers-by declared that they hadnoticed a man run out of the shop, he could neither see anyone norcould he find any means of identifying the rascal. It seemed to beone of those senseless acts of Hooliganism which occur from time totime, and it was reported to the constable on the beat as such. Theplaster cast was not worth more than a few shillings, and the wholeaffair appeared to be too childish for any particular investigation.
"The second case, however, was more serious and also more singular.It occurred only last night.
"In Kennington Road, and within a few hundred yards of Morse Hudson'sshop, there lives a well-known medical practitioner, named Dr.Barnicot, who has one of the largest practices upon the south side ofthe Thames. His residence and principal consulting-room is atKennington Road, but he has a branch surgery and dispensary at LowerBrixton Road, two miles away. This Dr. Barnicot is an enthusiasticadmirer of Napoleon, and his house is full of books, pictures, andrelics of the French Emperor. Some little time ago he purchased fromMorse Hudson two duplicate plaster casts of the famous head ofNapoleon by the French sculptor, Devine. One of these he placed inhis hall in the house at Kennington Road, and the other on themantelpiece of the surgery at Lower Brixton. Well, when Dr. Barnicotcame down this morning he was astonished to find that his house hadbeen burgled during the night, but that nothing had been taken savethe plaster head from the hall. It had been carried out and had beendashed savagely against the garden wall, under which its splinteredfragments were discovered."
Holmes rubbed his hands.
"This is certainly very novel," said he.
"I thought it would please you. But I have not got to the end yet.Dr. Barnicot was due at his surgery at twelve o'clock, and you canimagine his amazement when, on arriving there, he found that thewindow had been opened in the night, and that the broken pieces ofhis second bust were strewn all over the room. It had been smashed toatoms where it stood. In neither case were there any signs whichcould give us a clue as to the criminal or lunatic who had done themischief. Now, Mr. Holmes, you have got the facts."
"They are singular, not to say grotesque," said Holmes. "May I askwhether the two busts smashed in Dr. Barnicot's rooms were the exactduplicates of the one which was destroyed in Morse Hudson's shop?"
"They were taken from the same mould."
"Such a fact must tell against the theory that the man who breaksthem is influenced by any general hatred of Napoleon. Considering howmany hundreds of statues of the great Emperor must exist in London,it is too much to suppose such a coincidence as that a promiscuousiconoclast should chance to begin upon three specimens of the samebust."
"Well, I thought as you do," said Lestrade. "On the other hand, thisMorse Hudson is the purveyor of busts in that part of London, andthese three were the only ones which had been in his shop for years.So, although, as you say, there are many hundreds of statues inLondon, it is very probable that these three were the only ones inthat district. Therefore, a local fanatic would begin with them. Whatdo you think, Dr. Watson?"
"There are no limits to the possibilities of monomania," I answered."There is the condition which the modern French psychologists havecalled the 'ide fixe,' which may be trifling in character, andaccompanied by complete sanity in every other way. A man who had readdeeply about Napoleon, or who had possibly received some hereditaryfamily injury through the great war, might conceivably form such anide fixe and under its influence be capable of any fantasticoutrage."
"That won't do, my dear Watson," said Holmes, shaking his head; "forno amount of ide fixe would enable your interesting monomaniac tofind out where these busts were situated."
"Well, how do you explain it?"
"I don't attempt to do so. I would only observe that there is acertain method in the gentleman's eccentric proceedings. For example,in Dr. Barnicot's hall, where a sound might arouse the family, thebust was taken outside before being broken, whereas in the surgery,where there was less danger of an alarm, it was smashed where itstood. The affair seems absurdly trifling, and yet I dare callnothing trivial when I reflect that some of my most classic caseshave had the least promising commencement. You will remember, Watson,how the dreadful business of the Abernetty family was first broughtto my notice by the depth which the parsley had sunk into the butterupon a hot day. I can't afford, therefore, to smile at your threebroken busts, Lestrade, and I shall be very much obliged to you ifyou will let me hear of any fresh developments of so singular a chainof events."
The development for which my friend had asked came in a quicker andan infinitely more tragic form than he could have imagined. I wasstill dressing in my bedroom next morning when there was a tap at thedoor and Holmes entered, a telegram in his hand. He read it aloud:
"Come instantly, 131, Pitt Street, Kensington."Lestrade."
"What is it, then?" I asked.
"Don't know--may be anything. But I suspect it is the sequel of thestory of the statues. In that case our friend, the image-breaker, hasbegun operations in another quarter of London. There's coffee on thetable, Watson, and I have a cab at the door."
In half an hour we had reached Pitt Street, a quiet little backwaterjust beside one of the briskest currents of London life. No. 131 wasone of a row, all flat-chested, respectable, and most unromanticdwellings. As we drove up we found the railings in front of the houselined by a curious crowd. Holmes whistled.
"By George! it's attempted murder at the least. Nothing less willhold the London message-boy. There's a deed of violence indicated inthat fellow's round shoulders and outstretched neck. What's this,Watson? The top steps swilled down and the other ones dry. Footstepsenough, anyhow! Well, well, there's Lestrade at the front window, andwe shall soon know all about it."
The official received us with a very grave face and showed us into asitting-room, where an exceedingly unkempt and agitated elderly man,clad in a flannel dressing-gown, was pacing up and down. He wasintroduced to us as the owner of the house--Mr. Horace Harker, of theCentral Press Syndicate.
"It's the Napoleon bust business again," said Lestrade. "You seemedinterested last night, Mr. Holmes, so I thought perhaps you would beglad to be present now that the affair has taken a very much graverturn."
"What has it turned to, then?"
"To murder. Mr. Harker, will you tell these gentlemen exactly whathas occurred?"
The man in the dressing-gown turned upon us with a most melancholyface.
"It's an extraordinary thing," said he, "that all my life I have beencollecting other people's news, and now that a real piece of news hascome my own way I am so confused and bothered that I can't put twowords together. If I had come in here as a journalist I should haveinterviewed myself and had two columns in every evening paper. As itis I am giving away valuable copy by telling my story over and overto a string of different people, and I can make no use of it myself.However, I've heard your name, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and if you'llonly explain this queer business I shall be paid for my trouble intelling you the story."
Holmes sat down and listened.
"It all seems to centre round that bust of Napoleon which I boughtfor this very room about four months ago. I picked it up cheap fromHarding Brothers, two doors from the High Street Station. A greatdeal of my journalistic work is done at night, and I often writeuntil the early morning. So it was to-day. I was sitting in my den,which is at the back of the top of the house, about three o'clock,when I was convinced that I heard some sounds downstairs. I listened,but they were not repeated, and I concluded that they came fromoutside. Then suddenly, about five minutes later, there came a mosthorrible yell--the most dreadful sound, Mr. Holmes, that ever Iheard. It will ring in my ears as long as I live. I sat frozen withhorror for a minute or two. Then I seized the poker and wentdownstairs. When I entered this room I found the window wide open,and I at once observed that the bust was gone from the mantelpiece.Why any burglar should take such a thing passes my understanding, forit was only a plaster cast and of no real value whatever.
"You can see for yourself that anyone going out through that openwindow could reach the front doorstep by taking a long stride. Thiswas clearly what the burglar had done, so I went round and opened thedoor. Stepping out into the dark I nearly fell over a dead man whowas lying there. I ran back for a light, and there was the poorfellow, a great gash in his throat and the whole place swimming inblood. He lay on his back, his knees drawn up, and his mouth horriblyopen. I shall see him in my dreams. I had just time to blow on mypolice-whistle, and then I must have fainted, for I knew nothing moreuntil I found the policeman standing over me in the hall."
"Well, who was the murdered man?" asked Holmes.
"There's nothing to show who he was," said Lestrade. "You shall seethe body at the mortuary, but we have made nothing of it up to now.He is a tall man, sunburned, very powerful, not more than thirty. Heis poorly dressed, and yet does not appear to be a labourer. Ahorn-handled clasp knife was lying in a pool of blood beside him.Whether it was the weapon which did the deed, or whether it belongedto the dead man, I do not know. There was no name on his clothing,and nothing in his pockets save an apple, some string, a shilling mapof London, and a photograph. Here it is."
It was evidently taken by a snap-shot from a small camera. Itrepresented an alert, sharp-featured simian man with thick eyebrows,and a very peculiar projection of the lower part of the face like themuzzle of a baboon.
"And what became of the bust?" asked Holmes, after a careful study ofthis picture.
"We had news of it just before you came. It has been found in thefront garden of an empty house in Campden House Road. It was brokeninto fragments. I am going round now to see it. Will you come?"
"Certainly. I must just take one look round." He examined the carpetand the window. "The fellow had either very long legs or was a mostactive man," said he. "With an area beneath, it was no mean feat toreach that window-ledge and open that window. Getting back wascomparatively simple. Are you coming with us to see the remains ofyour bust, Mr. Harker?"
The disconsolate journalist had seated himself at a writing-table.
"I must try and make something of it," said he, "though I have nodoubt that the first editions of the evening papers are out alreadywith full details. It's like my luck! You remember when the standfell at Doncaster? Well, I was the only journalist in the stand, andmy journal the only one that had no account of it, for I was tooshaken to write it. And now I'll be too late with a murder done on myown doorstep."
As we left the room we heard his pen travelling shrilly over thefoolscap.
The spot where the fragments of the bust had been found was only afew hundred yards away. For the first time our eyes rested upon thispresentment of the great Emperor, which seemed to raise such franticand destructive hatred in the mind of the unknown. It lay scatteredin splintered shards upon the grass. Holmes picked up several of themand examined them carefully. I was convinced from his intent face andhis purposeful manner that at last he was upon a clue.
"Well?" asked Lestrade.
Holmes shrugged his shoulders.
"We have a long way to go yet," said he. "And yet--and yet--well, wehave some suggestive facts to act upon. The possession of thistrifling bust was worth more in the eyes of this strange criminalthan a human life. That is one point. Then there is the singular factthat he did not break it in the house, or immediately outside thehouse, if to break it was his sole object."
"He was rattled and bustled by meeting this other fellow. He hardlyknew what he was doing."
"Well, that's likely enough. But I wish to call your attention veryparticularly to the position of this house in the garden of which thebust was destroyed."
Lestrade looked about him.
"It was an empty house, and so he knew that he would not be disturbedin the garden."
"Yes, but there is another empty house farther up the street which hemust have passed before he came to this one. Why did he not break itthere, since it is evident that every yard that he carried itincreased the risk of someone meeting him?"
"I give it up," said Lestrade.
Holmes pointed to the street lamp above our heads.
"He could see what he was doing here and he could not there. That washis reason."
"By Jove! that's true," said the detective. "Now that I come to thinkof it, Dr. Barnicot's bust was broken not far from his red lamp.Well, Mr. Holmes, what are we to do with that fact?"
"To remember it--to docket it. We may come on something later whichwill bear upon it. What steps do you propose to take now, Lestrade?"
"The most practical way of getting at it, in my opinion, is toidentify the dead man. There should be no difficulty about that. Whenwe have found who he is and who his associates are, we should have agood start in learning what he was doing in Pitt Street last night,and who it was who met him and killed him on the doorstep of Mr.Horace Harker. Don't you think so?"
"No doubt; and yet it is not quite the way in which I should approachthe case."
"What would you do, then?"
"Oh, you must not let me influence you in any way! I suggest that yougo on your line and I on mine. We can compare notes afterwards, andeach will supplement the other."
"Very good," said Lestrade.
"If you are going back to Pitt Street you might see Mr. HoraceHarker. Tell him from me that I have quite made up my mind, and thatit is certain that a dangerous homicidal lunatic with Napoleonicdelusions was in his house last night. It will be useful for hisarticle."
Lestrade stared.
"You don't seriously believe that?"
Holmes smiled.
"Don't I? Well, perhaps I don't. But I am sure that it will interestMr. Horace Harker and the subscribers of the Central Press Syndicate.Now, Watson, I think that we shall find that we have a long andrather complex day's work before us. I should be glad, Lestrade, ifyou could make it convenient to meet us at Baker Street at sixo'clock this evening. Until then I should like to keep thisphotograph found in the dead man's pocket. It is possible that I mayhave to ask your company and assistance upon a small expedition whichwill have be undertaken to-night, if my chain of reasoning shouldprove to be correct. Until then, good-bye and good luck!"
Sherlock Holmes and I walked together to the High Street, where hestopped at the shop of Harding Brothers, whence the bust had beenpurchased. A young assistant informed us that Mr. Harding would beabsent until after noon, and that he was himself a newcomer who couldgive us no information. Holmes's face showed his disappointment andannoyance.
"Well, well, we can't expect to have it all our own way, Watson," hesaid, at last. "We must come back in the afternoon if Mr. Hardingwill not be here until then. I am, as you have no doubt surmised,endeavouring to trace these busts to their source, in order to findif there is not something peculiar which may account for theirremarkable fate. Let us make for Mr. Morse Hudson, of the KenningtonRoad, and see if he can throw any light upon the problem."
A drive of an hour brought us to the picture-dealer's establishment.He was a small, stout man with a red face and a peppery manner.
"Yes, sir. On my very counter, sir," said he. "What we pay rates andtaxes for I don't know, when any ruffian can come in and break one'sgoods. Yes, sir, it was I who sold Dr. Barnicot his two statues.Disgraceful, sir! A Nihilist plot, that's what I make it. No one butan Anarchist would go about breaking statues. Red republicans, that'swhat I call 'em. Who did I get the statues from? I don't see whatthat has to do with it. Well, if you really want to know, I got themfrom Gelder & Co., in Church Street, Stepney. They are a well-knownhouse in the trade, and have been this twenty years. How many had I?Three--two and one are three--two of Dr. Barnicot's and one smashedin broad daylight on my own counter. Do I know that photograph? No, Idon't. Yes, I do, though. Why, it's Beppo. He was a kind of Italianpiece-work man, who made himself useful in the shop. He could carve abit and gild and frame, and do odd jobs. The fellow left me lastweek, and I've heard nothing of him since. No, I don't know where hecame from nor where he went to. I have nothing against him while hewas here. He was gone two days before the bust was smashed."
"Well, that's all we could reasonably expect to get from MorseHudson," said Holmes, as we emerged from the shop. "We have thisBeppo as a common factor, both in Kennington and in Kensington, sothat is worth a ten-mile drive. Now, Watson, let us make for Gelder &Co., of Stepney, the source and origin of busts. I shall be surprisedif we don't get some help down there."
In rapid succession we passed through the fringe of fashionableLondon, hotel London, theatrical London, literary London, commercialLondon, and, finally, maritime London, till we came to a riversidecity of a hundred thousand souls, where the tenement houses swelterand reek with the outcasts of Europe. Here, in a broad thoroughfare,once the abode of wealthy City merchants, we found the sculptureworks for which we searched. Outside was a considerable yard full ofmonumental masonry. Inside was a large room in which fifty workerswere carving or moulding. The manager, a big blond German, receivedus civilly, and gave a clear answer to all Holmes's questions. Areference to his books showed that hundreds of casts had been takenfrom a marble copy of Devine's head of Napoleon, but that the threewhich had been sent to Morse Hudson a year or so before had been halfof a batch of six, the other three being sent to Harding Brothers, ofKensington. There was no reason why those six should be different toany of the other casts. He could suggest no possible cause why anyoneshould wish to destroy them--in fact, he laughed at the idea. Theirwholesale price was six shillings, but the retailer would get twelveor more. The cast was taken in two moulds from each side of the face,and then these two profiles of plaster of Paris were joined togetherto make the complete bust. The work was usually done by Italians inthe room we were in. When finished the busts were put on a table inthe passage to dry, and afterwards stored. That was all he could tellus.
But the production of the photograph had a remarkable effect upon themanager. His face flushed with anger, and his brows knotted over hisblue Teutonic eyes.
"Ah, the rascal!" he cried. "Yes, indeed, I know him very well. Thishas always been a respectable establishment, and the only time thatwe have ever had the police in it was over this very fellow. It wasmore than a year ago now. He knifed another Italian in the street,and then he came to the works with the police on his heels, and hewas taken here. Beppo was his name--his second name I never knew.Serve me right for engaging a man with such a face. But he was a goodworkman, one of the best."
"What did he get?"
"The man lived and he got off with a year. I have no doubt he is outnow; but he has not dared to show his nose here. We have a cousin ofhis here, and I dare say he could tell you where he is."
"No, no," cried Holmes, "not a word to the cousin--not a word, I begyou. The matter is very important, and the farther I go with it themore important it seems to grow. When you referred in your ledger tothe sale of those casts I observed that the date was June 3rd of lastyear. Could you give me the date when Beppo was arrested?"
"I could tell you roughly by the pay-list," the manager answered."Yes," he continued, after some turning over of pages, "he was paidlast on May 20th."
"Thank you," said Holmes. "I don't think that I need intrude uponyour time and patience any more." With a last word of caution that heshould say nothing as to our researches we turned our faces westwardonce more.
The afternoon was far advanced before we were able to snatch a hastyluncheon at a restaurant. A news-bill at the entrance announced"Kensington Outrage. Murder by a Madman," and the contents of thepaper showed that Mr. Horace Harker had got his account into printafter all. Two columns were occupied with a highly sensational andflowery rendering of the whole incident. Holmes propped it againstthe cruet-stand and read it while he ate. Once or twice he chuckled.
"This is all right, Watson," said he. "Listen to this:
"It is satisfactory to know that there can be no difference ofopinion upon this case, since Mr. Lestrade, one of the mostexperienced members of the official force, and Mr. Sherlock Holmes,the well-known consulting expert, have each come to the conclusionthat the grotesque series of incidents, which have ended in so tragica fashion, arise from lunacy rather than from deliberate crime. Noexplanation save mental aberration can cover the facts.
"The Press, Watson, is a most valuable institution if you only knowhow to use it. And now, if you have quite finished, we will hark backto Kensington and see what the manager of Harding Brothers has to sayto the matter."
The founder of that great emporium proved to be a brisk, crisp littleperson, very dapper and quick, with a clear head and a ready tongue.
"Yes, sir, I have already read the account in the evening papers. Mr.Horace Harker is a customer of ours. We supplied him with the bustsome months ago. We ordered three busts of that sort from Gelder &Co., of Stepney. They are all sold now. To whom? Oh, I dare say byconsulting our sales book we could very easily tell you. Yes, we havethe entries here. One to Mr. Harker, you see, and one to Mr. JosiahBrown, of Laburnum Lodge, Laburnum Vale, Chiswick, and one to Mr.Sandeford, of Lower Grove Road, Reading. No, I have never seen thisface which you show me in the photograph. You would hardly forget it,would you, sir, for I've seldom seen an uglier. Have we any Italianson the staff? Yes, sir, we have several among our workpeople andcleaners. I dare say they might get a peep at that sales book if theywanted to. There is no particular reason for keeping a watch uponthat book. Well, well, it's a very strange business, and I hope thatyou'll let me know if anything comes of your inquiries."
Holmes had taken several notes during Mr. Harding's evidence, and Icould see that he was thoroughly satisfied by the turn which affairswere taking. He made no remark, however, save that, unless wehurried, we should be late for our appointment with Lestrade. Sureenough, when we reached Baker Street the detective was already there,and we found him pacing up and down in a fever of impatience. Hislook of importance showed that his day's work had not been in vain.
"Well?" he asked. "What luck, Mr. Holmes?"
"We have had a very busy day, and not entirely a wasted one," myfriend explained. "We have seen both the retailers and also thewholesale manufacturers. I can trace each of the busts now from thebeginning."
"The busts!" cried Lestrade. "Well, well, you have your own methods,Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and it is not for me to say a word against them,but I think I have done a better day's work than you. I haveidentified the dead man."
"You don't say so?"
"And found a cause for the crime."
"Splendid!"
"We have an inspector who makes a specialty of Saffron Hill and theItalian quarter. Well, this dead man had some Catholic emblem roundhis neck, and that, along with his colour, made me think he was fromthe South. Inspector Hill knew him the moment he caught sight of him.His name is Pietro Venucci, from Naples, and he is one of thegreatest cut-throats in London. He is connected with the Mafia,which, as you know, is a secret political society, enforcing itsdecrees by murder. Now you see how the affair begins to clear up. Theother fellow is probably an Italian also, and a member of the Mafia.He has broken the rules in some fashion. Pietro is set upon histrack. Probably the photograph we found in his pocket is the manhimself, so that he may not knife the wrong person. He dogs thefellow, he sees him enter a house, he waits outside for him, and inthe scuffle he receives his own death-wound. How is that, Mr.Sherlock Holmes?"
Holmes clapped his hands approvingly.
"Excellent, Lestrade, excellent!" he cried. "But I didn't quitefollow your explanation of the destruction of the busts."
"The busts! You never can get those busts out of your head. Afterall, that is nothing; petty larceny, six months at the most. It isthe murder that we are really investigating, and I tell you that I amgathering all the threads into my hands."
"And the next stage?"
"Is a very simple one. I shall go down with Hill to the Italianquarter, find the man whose photograph we have got, and arrest him onthe charge of murder. Will you come with us?"
"I think not. I fancy we can attain our end in a simpler way. I can'tsay for certain, because it all depends--well, it all depends upon afactor which is completely outside our control. But I have greathopes--in fact, the betting is exactly two to one--that if you willcome with us to-night I shall be able to help you to lay him by theheels."
"In the Italian quarter?"
"No; I fancy Chiswick is an address which is more likely to find him.If you will come with me to Chiswick to-night, Lestrade, I'll promiseto go to the Italian quarter with you to-morrow, and no harm will bedone by the delay. And now I think that a few hours' sleep would dous all good, for I do not propose to leave before eleven o'clock, andit is unlikely that we shall be back before morning. You'll dine withus, Lestrade, and then you are welcome to the sofa until it is timefor us to start. In the meantime, Watson, I should be glad if youwould ring for an express messenger, for I have a letter to send, andit is important that it should go at once."
Holmes spent the evening in rummaging among the files of the olddaily papers with which one of our lumber-rooms was packed. When atlast he descended it was with triumph in his eyes, but he saidnothing to either of us as to the result of his researches. For myown part, I had followed step by step the methods by which he hadtraced the various windings of this complex case, and, though I couldnot yet perceive the goal which we would reach, I understood clearlythat Holmes expected this grotesque criminal to make an attempt uponthe two remaining busts, one of which, I remembered, was at Chiswick.No doubt the object of our journey was to catch him in the very act,and I could not but admire the cunning with which my friend hadinserted a wrong clue in the evening paper, so as to give the fellowthe idea that he could continue his scheme with impunity. I was notsurprised when Holmes suggested that I should take my revolver withme. He had himself picked up the loaded hunting-crop which was hisfavourite weapon.
A four-wheeler was at the door at eleven, and in it we drove to aspot at the other side of Hammersmith Bridge. Here the cabman wasdirected to wait. A short walk brought us to a secluded road fringedwith pleasant houses, each standing in its own grounds. In the lightof a street lamp we read "Laburnum Villa" upon the gate-post of oneof them. The occupants had evidently retired to rest, for all wasdark save for a fanlight over the hall door, which shed a singleblurred circle on to the garden path. The wooden fence whichseparated the grounds from the road threw a dense black shadow uponthe inner side, and here it was that we crouched.
"I fear that you'll have a long wait," Holmes whispered. "We maythank our stars that it is not raining. I don't think we can evenventure to smoke to pass the time. However, it's a two to one chancethat we get something to pay us for our trouble."
It proved, however, that our vigil was not to be so long as Holmeshad led us to fear, and it ended in a very sudden and singularfashion. In an instant, without the least sound to warn us of hiscoming, the garden gate swung open, and a lithe, dark figure, asswift and active as an ape, rushed up the garden path. We saw itwhisk past the light thrown from over the door and disappear againstthe black shadow of the house. There was a long pause, during whichwe held our breath, and then a very gentle creaking sound came to ourears. The window was being opened. The noise ceased, and again therewas a long silence. The fellow was making his way into the house. Wesaw the sudden flash of a dark lantern inside the room. What hesought was evidently not there, for again we saw the flash throughanother blind, and then through another.
"Let us get to the open window. We will nab him as he climbs out,"Lestrade whispered.
But before we could move the man had emerged again. As he came outinto the glimmering patch of light we saw that he carried somethingwhite under his arm. He looked stealthily all round him. The silenceof the deserted street reassured him. Turning his back upon us helaid down his burden, and the next instant there was the sound of asharp tap, followed by a clatter and rattle. The man was so intentupon what he was doing that he never heard our steps as we stoleacross the grass plot. With the bound of a tiger Holmes was on hisback, and an instant later Lestrade and I had him by either wrist andthe handcuffs had been fastened. As we turned him over I saw ahideous, sallow face, with writhing, furious features, glaring up atus, and I knew that it was indeed the man of the photograph whom wehad secured.
But it was not our prisoner to whom Holmes was giving his attention.Squatted on the doorstep, he was engaged in most carefully examiningthat which the man had brought from the house. It was a bust ofNapoleon like the one which we had seen that morning, and it had beenbroken into similar fragments. Carefully Holmes held each separateshard to the light, but in no way did it differ from any othershattered piece of plaster. He had just completed his examinationwhen the hall lights flew up, the door opened, and the owner of thehouse, a jovial, rotund figure in shirt and trousers, presentedhimself.
"Mr. Josiah Brown, I suppose?" said Holmes.
"Yes, sir; and you, no doubt, are Mr. Sherlock Holmes? I had the notewhich you sent by the express messenger, and I did exactly what youtold me. We locked every door on the inside and awaited developments.Well, I'm very glad to see that you have got the rascal. I hope,gentlemen, that you will come in and have some refreshment."
However, Lestrade was anxious to get his man into safe quarters, sowithin a few minutes our cab had been summoned and we were all fourupon our way to London. Not a word would our captive say; but heglared at us from the shadow of his matted hair, and once, when myhand seemed within his reach, he snapped at it like a hungry wolf. Westayed long enough at the police-station to learn that a search ofhis clothing revealed nothing save a few shillings and a long sheathknife, the handle of which bore copious traces of recent blood.
"That's all right," said Lestrade, as we parted. "Hill knows allthese gentry, and he will give a name to him. You'll find that mytheory of the Mafia will work out all right. But I'm sure I amexceedingly obliged to you, Mr. Holmes, for the workmanlike way inwhich you laid hands upon him. I don't quite understand it all yet."
"I fear it is rather too late an hour for explanations," said Holmes."Besides, there are one or two details which are not finished off,and it is one of those cases which are worth working out to the veryend. If you will come round once more to my rooms at six o'clockto-morrow I think I shall be able to show you that even now you havenot grasped the entire meaning of this business, which presents somefeatures which make it absolutely original in the history of crime.If ever I permit you to chronicle any more of my little problems,Watson, I foresee that you will enliven your pages by an account ofthe singular adventure of the Napoleonic busts."
When we met again next evening Lestrade was furnished with muchinformation concerning our prisoner. His name, it appeared, wasBeppo, second name unknown. He was a well-known ne'er-do-well amongthe Italian colony. He had once been a skilful sculptor and hadearned an honest living, but he had taken to evil courses and hadtwice already been in jail--once for a petty theft and once, as wehad already heard, for stabbing a fellow-countryman. He could talkEnglish perfectly well. His reasons for destroying the busts werestill unknown, and he refused to answer any questions upon thesubject; but the police had discovered that these same busts mightvery well have been made by his own hands, since he was engaged inthis class of work at the establishment of Gelder & Co. To all thisinformation, much of which we already knew, Holmes listened withpolite attention; but I, who knew him so well, could clearly see thathis thoughts were elsewhere, and I detected a mixture of mingleduneasiness and expectation beneath that mask which he was wont toassume. At last he started in his chair and his eyes brightened.There had been a ring at the bell. A minute later we heard steps uponthe stairs, and an elderly, red-faced man with grizzled side-whiskerswas ushered in. In his right hand he carried an old-fashionedcarpet-bag, which he placed upon the table.
"Is Mr. Sherlock Holmes here?"
My friend bowed and smiled. "Mr. Sandeford, of Reading, I suppose?"said he.
"Yes, sir, I fear that I am a little late; but the trains wereawkward. You wrote to me about a bust that is in my possession."
"Exactly."
"I have your letter here. You said, 'I desire to possess a copy ofDevine's Napoleon, and am prepared to pay you ten pounds for the onewhich is in your possession.' Is that right?"
"Certainly."
"I was very much surprised at your letter, for I could not imaginehow you knew that I owned such a thing."
"Of course you must have been surprised, but the explanation is verysimple. Mr. Harding, of Harding Brothers, said that they had sold youtheir last copy, and he gave me your address."
"Oh, that was it, was it? Did he tell you what I paid for it?"
"No, he did not."
"Well, I am an honest man, though not a very rich one. I only gavefifteen shillings for the bust, and I think you ought to know thatbefore I take ten pounds from you."
"I am sure the scruple does you honour, Mr. Sandeford. But I havenamed that price, so I intend to stick to it."
"Well, it is very handsome of you, Mr. Holmes. I brought the bust upwith me, as you asked me to do. Here it is!" He opened his bag, andat last we saw placed upon our table a complete specimen of that bustwhich we had already seen more than once in fragments.
Holmes took a paper from his pocket and laid a ten-pound note uponthe table.
"You will kindly sign that paper, Mr. Sandeford, in the presence ofthese witnesses. It is simply to say that you transfer every possibleright that you ever had in the bust to me. I am a methodical man, yousee, and you never know what turn events might take afterwards. Thankyou, Mr. Sandeford; here is your money, and I wish you a very goodevening."
When our visitor had disappeared Sherlock Holmes's movements weresuch as to rivet our attention. He began by taking a clean whitecloth from a drawer and laying it over the table. Then he placed hisnewly-acquired bust in the centre of the cloth. Finally, he picked uphis hunting-crop and struck Napoleon a sharp blow on the top of thehead. The figure broke into fragments, and Holmes bent eagerly overthe shattered remains. Next instant, with a loud shout of triumph, heheld up one splinter, in which a round, dark object was fixed like aplum in a pudding.
"Gentlemen," he cried, "let me introduce you to the famous blackpearl of the Borgias."
Lestrade and I sat silent for a moment, and then, with a spontaneousimpulse, we both broke out clapping as at the well-wrought crisis ofa play. A flush of colour sprang to Holmes's pale cheeks, and hebowed to us like the master dramatist who receives the homage of hisaudience. It was at such moments that for an instant he ceased to bea reasoning machine, and betrayed his human love for admiration andapplause. The same singularly proud and reserved nature which turnedaway with disdain from popular notoriety was capable of being movedto its depths by spontaneous wonder and praise from a friend.
"Yes, gentlemen," said he, "it is the most famous pearl now existingin the world, and it has been my good fortune, by a connected chainof inductive reasoning, to trace it from the Prince of Colonna'sbedroom at the Dacre Hotel, where it was lost, to the interior ofthis, the last of the six busts of Napoleon which were manufacturedby Gelder & Co., of Stepney. You will remember, Lestrade, thesensation caused by the disappearance of this valuable jewel, and thevain efforts of the London police to recover it. I was myselfconsulted upon the case; but I was unable to throw any light upon it.Suspicion fell upon the maid of the Princess, who was an Italian, andit was proved that she had a brother in London, but we failed totrace any connection between them. The maid's name was LucretiaVenucci, and there is no doubt in my mind that this Pietro who wasmurdered two nights ago was the brother. I have been looking up thedates in the old files of the paper, and I find that thedisappearance of the pearl was exactly two days before the arrest ofBeppo for some crime of violence, an event which took place in thefactory of Gelder & Co., at the very moment when these busts werebeing made. Now you clearly see the sequence of events, though yousee them, of course, in the inverse order to the way in which theypresented themselves to me. Beppo had the pearl in his possession. Hemay have stolen it from Pietro, he may have been Pietro'sconfederate, he may have been the go-between of Pietro and hissister. It is of no consequence to us which is the correct solution.
"The main fact is that he had the pearl, and at that moment, when itwas on his person, he was pursued by the police. He made for thefactory in which he worked, and he knew that he had only a fewminutes in which to conceal this enormously valuable prize, whichwould otherwise be found on him when he was searched. Six plastercasts of Napoleon were drying in the passage. One of them was stillsoft. In an instant Beppo, a skilful workman, made a small hole inthe wet plaster, dropped in the pearl, and with a few touches coveredover the aperture once more. It was an admirable hiding-place. No onecould possibly find it. But Beppo was condemned to a year'simprisonment, and in the meanwhile his six busts were scattered overLondon. He could not tell which contained his treasure. Only bybreaking them could he see. Even shaking would tell him nothing, foras the plaster was wet it was probable that the pearl would adhere toit--as, in fact, it has done. Beppo did not despair, and he conductedhis search with considerable ingenuity and perseverance. Through acousin who works with Gelder he found out the retail firms who hadbought the busts. He managed to find employment with Morse Hudson,and in that way tracked down three of them. The pearl was not there.Then, with the help of some Italian employe, he succeeded in findingout where the other three busts had gone. The first was at Harker's.There he was dogged by his confederate, who held Beppo responsiblefor the loss of the pearl, and he stabbed him in the scuffle whichfollowed."
"If he was his confederate why should he carry his photograph?" Iasked.
"As a means of tracing him if he wished to inquire about him from anythird person. That was the obvious reason. Well, after the murder Icalculated that Beppo would probably hurry rather than delay hismovements. He would fear that the police would read his secret, andso he hastened on before they should get ahead of him. Of course, Icould not say that he had not found the pearl in Harker's bust. I hadnot even concluded for certain that it was the pearl; but it wasevident to me that he was looking for something, since he carried thebust past the other houses in order to break it in the garden whichhad a lamp overlooking it. Since Harker's bust was one in three thechances were exactly as I told you, two to one against the pearlbeing inside it. There remained two busts, and it was obvious that hewould go for the London one first. I warned the inmates of the house,so as to avoid a second tragedy, and we went down with the happiestresults. By that time, of course, I knew for certain that it was theBorgia pearl that we were after. The name of the murdered man linkedthe one event with the other. There only remained a single bust--theReading one--and the pearl must be there. I bought it in yourpresence from the owner--and there it lies."
We sat in silence for a moment.
"Well," said Lestrade, "I've seen you handle a good many cases, Mr.Holmes, but I don't know that I ever knew a more workmanlike one thanthat. We're not jealous of you at Scotland Yard. No, sir, we are veryproud of you, and if you come down to-morrow there's not a man, fromthe oldest inspector to the youngest constable, who wouldn't be gladto shake you by the hand."
"Thank you!" said Holmes. "Thank you!" and as he turned away itseemed to me that he was more nearly moved by the softer humanemotions than I had ever seen him. A moment later he was the cold andpractical thinker once more. "Put the pearl in the safe, Watson,"said he, "and get out the papers of the Conk-Singleton forgery case.Good-bye, Lestrade. If any little problem comes your way I shall behappy, if I can, to give you a hint or two as to its solution."





                  THE ADVENTURE OF THE THREE STUDENTS
It was in the year '95 that a combination of events, into which Ineed not enter, caused Mr. Sherlock Holmes and myself to spend someweeks in one of our great University towns, and it was during thistime that the small but instructive adventure which I am about torelate befell us. It will be obvious that any details which wouldhelp the reader to exactly identify the college or the criminal wouldbe injudicious and offensive. So painful a scandal may well beallowed to die out. With due discretion the incident itself may,however, be described, since it serves to illustrate some of thosequalities for which my friend was remarkable. I will endeavour in mystatement to avoid such terms as would serve to limit the events toany particular place, or give a clue as to the people concerned.
We were residing at the time in furnished lodgings close to a librarywhere Sherlock Holmes was pursuing some laborious researches in earlyEnglish charters--researches which led to results so striking thatthey may be the subject of one of my future narratives. Here it wasthat one evening we received a visit from an acquaintance, Mr. HiltonSoames, tutor and lecturer at the College of St. Luke's. Mr. Soameswas a tall, spare man, of a nervous and excitable temperament. I hadalways known him to be restless in his manner, but on this particularoccasion he was in such a state of uncontrollable agitation that itwas clear something very unusual had occurred.
"I trust, Mr. Holmes, that you can spare me a few hours of yourvaluable time. We have had a very painful incident at St. Luke's, andreally, but for the happy chance of your being in the town, I shouldhave been at a loss what to do."
"I am very busy just now, and I desire no distractions," my friendanswered. "I should much prefer that you called in the aid of thepolice."
"No, no, my dear sir; such a course is utterly impossible. When oncethe law is evoked it cannot be stayed again, and this is just one ofthose cases where, for the credit of the college, it is mostessential to avoid scandal. Your discretion is as well known as yourpowers, and you are the one man in the world who can help me. I begyou, Mr. Holmes, to do what you can."
My friend's temper had not improved since he had been deprived of thecongenial surroundings of Baker Street. Without his scrap-books, hischemicals, and his homely untidiness, he was an uncomfortable man. Heshrugged his shoulders in ungracious acquiescence, while our visitorin hurried words and with much excitable gesticulation poured forthhis story.
"I must explain to you, Mr. Holmes, that to-morrow is the first dayof the examination for the Fortescue Scholarship. I am one of theexaminers. My subject is Greek, and the first of the papers consistsof a large passage of Greek translation which the candidate has notseen. This passage is printed on the examination paper, and it wouldnaturally be an immense advantage if the candidate could prepare itin advance. For this reason great care is taken to keep the papersecret.
"To-day about three o'clock the proofs of this paper arrived from theprinters. The exercise consists of half a chapter of Thucydides. Ihad to read it over carefully, as the text must be absolutelycorrect. At four-thirty my task was not yet completed. I had,however, promised to take tea in a friend's rooms, so I left theproof upon my desk. I was absent rather more than an hour.
"You are aware, Mr. Holmes, that our college doors are double--agreen baize one within and a heavy oak one without. As I approachedmy outer door I was amazed to see a key in it. For an instant Iimagined that I had left my own there, but on feeling in my pocket Ifound that it was all right. The only duplicate which existed, so faras I knew, was that which belonged to my servant, Bannister, a manwho has looked after my room for ten years, and whose honesty isabsolutely above suspicion. I found that the key was indeed his, thathe had entered my room to know if I wanted tea, and that he had verycarelessly left the key in the door when he came out. His visit to myroom must have been within a very few minutes of my leaving it. Hisforgetfulness about the key would have mattered little upon any otheroccasion, but on this one day it has produced the most deplorableconsequences.
"The moment I looked at my table I was aware that someone hadrummaged among my papers. The proof was in three long slips. I hadleft them all together. Now, I found that one of them was lying onthe floor, one was on the side table near the window, and the thirdwas where I had left it."
Holmes stirred for the first time.
"The first page on the floor, the second in the window, the thirdwhere you left it," said he.
"Exactly, Mr. Holmes. You amaze me. How could you possibly knowthat?"
"Pray continue your very interesting statement."
"For an instant I imagined that Bannister had taken the unpardonableliberty of examining my papers. He denied it, however, with theutmost earnestness, and I am convinced that he was speaking thetruth. The alternative was that someone passing had observed the keyin the door, had known that I was out, and had entered to look at thepapers. A large sum of money is at stake, for the scholarship is avery valuable one, and an unscrupulous man might very well run a riskin order to gain an advantage over his fellows.
"Bannister was very much upset by the incident. He had nearly faintedwhen we found that the papers had undoubtedly been tampered with. Igave him a little brandy and left him collapsed in a chair while Imade a most careful examination of the room. I soon saw that theintruder had left other traces of his presence besides the rumpledpapers. On the table in the window were several shreds from a pencilwhich had been sharpened. A broken tip of lead was lying there also.Evidently the rascal had copied the paper in a great hurry, hadbroken his pencil, and had been compelled to put a fresh point toit."
"Excellent!" said Holmes, who was recovering his good-humour as hisattention became more engrossed by the case. "Fortune has been yourfriend."
"This was not all. I have a new writing-table with a fine surface ofred leather. I am prepared to swear, and so is Bannister, that it wassmooth and unstained. Now I found a clean cut in it about threeinches long--not a mere scratch, but a positive cut. Not only this,but on the table I found a small ball of black dough, or clay, withspecks of something which looks like sawdust in it. I am convincedthat these marks were left by the man who rifled the papers. Therewere no footmarks and no other evidence as to his identity. I was atmy wits' ends, when suddenly the happy thought occurred to me thatyou were in the town, and I came straight round to put the matterinto your hands. Do help me, Mr. Holmes! You see my dilemma. Either Imust find the man or else the examination must be postponed untilfresh papers are prepared, and since this cannot be done withoutexplanation there will ensue a hideous scandal, which will throw acloud not only on the college, but on the University. Above allthings I desire to settle the matter quietly and discreetly."
"I shall be happy to look into it and to give you such advice as Ican," said Holmes, rising and putting on his overcoat. "The case isnot entirely devoid of interest. Had anyone visited you in your roomafter the papers came to you?"
"Yes; young Daulat Ras, an Indian student who lives on the samestair, came in to ask me some particulars about the examination."
"For which he was entered?"
"Yes."
"And the papers were on your table?"
"To the best of my belief they were rolled up."
"But might be recognised as proofs?"
"Possibly."
"No one else in your room?"
"No."
"Did anyone know that these proofs would be there?"
"No one save the printer."
"Did this man Bannister know?"
"No, certainly not. No one knew."
"Where is Bannister now?"
"He was very ill, poor fellow. I left him collapsed in the chair. Iwas in such a hurry to come to you."
"You left your door open?"
"I locked up the papers first."
"Then it amounts to this, Mr. Soames, that unless the Indian studentrecognised the roll as being proofs, the man who tampered with themcame upon them accidentally without knowing that they were there."
"So it seems to me."
Holmes gave an enigmatic smile.
"Well," said he, "let us go round. Not one of your cases,Watson--mental, not physical. All right; come if you want to. Now,Mr. Soames--at your disposal!"
 The sitting-room of our client opened by a long, low, latticedwindow on to the ancient lichen-tinted court of the old college. AGothic arched door led to a worn stone staircase. On the ground floorwas the tutor's room. Above were three students, one on each story.It was already twilight when we reached the scene of our problem.Holmes halted and looked earnestly at the window. Then he approachedit, and, standing on tiptoe with his neck craned, he looked into theroom.
"He must have entered through the door. There is no opening exceptthe one pane," said our learned guide.
"Dear me!" said Holmes, and he smiled in a singular way as he glancedat our companion. "Well, if there is nothing to be learned here wehad best go inside."
The lecturer unlocked the outer door and ushered us into his room. Westood at the entrance while Holmes made an examination of the carpet.
"I am afraid there are no signs here," said he. "One could hardlyhope for any upon so dry a day. Your servant seems to have quiterecovered. You left him in a chair, you say; which chair?"
"By the window there."
"I see. Near this little table. You can come in now. I have finishedwith the carpet. Let us take the little table first. Of course, whathas happened is very clear. The man entered and took the papers,sheet by sheet, from the central table. He carried them over to thewindow table, because from there he could see if you came across thecourtyard, and so could effect an escape."
"As a matter of fact he could not," said Soames, "for I entered bythe side door."
"Ah, that's good! Well, anyhow, that was in his mind. Let me see thethree strips. No finger impressions--no! Well, he carried over thisone first and he copied it. How long would it take him to do that,using every possible contraction? A quarter of an hour, not less.Then he tossed it down and seized the next. He was in the midst ofthat when your return caused him to make a very hurried retreat--veryhurried, since he had not time to replace the papers which would tellyou that he had been there. You were not aware of any hurrying feeton the stair as you entered the outer door?"
"No, I can't say I was."
"Well, he wrote so furiously that he broke his pencil, and had, asyou observe, to sharpen it again. This is of interest, Watson. Thepencil was not an ordinary one. It was above the usual size, with asoft lead; the outer colour was dark blue, the maker's name wasprinted in silver lettering, and the piece remaining is only about aninch and a half long. Look for such a pencil, Mr. Soames, and youhave got your man. When I add that he possesses a large and veryblunt knife, you have an additional aid."
Mr. Soames was somewhat overwhelmed by this flood of information. "Ican follow the other points," said he, "but really, in this matter ofthe length--"
Holmes held out a small chip with the letters NN and a space of clearwood after them.
"You see?"
"No, I fear that even now--"
"Watson, I have always done you an injustice. There are others. Whatcould this NN be? It is at the end of a word. You are aware thatJohann Faber is the most common maker's name. Is it not clear thatthere is just as much of the pencil left as usually follows theJohann?" He held the small table sideways to the electric light. "Iwas hoping that if the paper on which he wrote was thin some trace ofit might come through upon this polished surface. No, I see nothing.I don't think there is anything more to be learned here. Now for thecentral table. This small pellet is, I presume, the black, doughymass you spoke of. Roughly pyramidal in shape and hollowed out, Iperceive. As you say, there appear to be grains of sawdust in it.Dear me, this is very interesting. And the cut--a positive tear, Isee. It began with a thin scratch and ended in a jagged hole. I ammuch indebted to you for directing my attention to this case, Mr.Soames. Where does that door lead to?"
"To my bedroom."
"Have you been in it since your adventure?"
"No; I came straight away for you."
"I should like to have a glance round. What a charming, old-fashionedroom! Perhaps you will kindly wait a minute until I have examined thefloor. No, I see nothing. What about this curtain? You hang yourclothes behind it. If anyone were forced to conceal himself in thisroom he must do it there, since the bed is too low and the wardrobetoo shallow. No one there, I suppose?"
As Holmes drew the curtain I was aware, from some little rigidity andalertness of his attitude, that he was prepared for an emergency. Asa matter of fact the drawn curtain disclosed nothing but three orfour suits of clothes hanging from a line of pegs. Holmes turned awayand stooped suddenly to the floor.
"Halloa! What's this?" said he.
It was a small pyramid of black, putty-like stuff, exactly like theone upon the table of the study. Holmes held it out on his open palmin the glare of the electric light.
"Your visitor seems to have left traces in your bedroom as well as inyour sitting-room, Mr. Soames."
"What could he have wanted there?"
"I think it is clear enough. You came back by an unexpected way, andso he had no warning until you were at the very door. What could hedo? He caught up everything which would betray him and he rushed intoyour bedroom to conceal himself."
"Good gracious, Mr. Holmes, do you mean to tell me that all the timeI was talking to Bannister in this room we had the man prisoner if wehad only known it?"
"So I read it."
"Surely there is another alternative, Mr. Holmes. I don't knowwhether you observed my bedroom window?"
"Lattice-paned, lead framework, three separate windows, one swingingon hinge and large enough to admit a man."
"Exactly. And it looks out on an angle of the courtyard so as to bepartly invisible. The man might have effected his entrance there,left traces as he passed through the bedroom, and, finally, findingthe door open have escaped that way."
Holmes shook his head impatiently.
"Let us be practical," said he. "I understand you to say that thereare three students who use this stair and are in the habit of passingyour door?"
"Yes, there are."
"And they are all in for this examination?"
"Yes."
"Have you any reason to suspect any one of them more than theothers?"
Soames hesitated.
"It is a very delicate question," said he. "One hardly likes to throwsuspicion where there are no proofs."
"Let us hear the suspicions. I will look after the proofs."
"I will tell you, then, in a few words the character of the three menwho inhabit these rooms. The lower of the three is Gilchrist, a finescholar and athlete; plays in the Rugby team and the cricket team forthe college, and got his Blue for the hurdles and the long jump. Heis a fine, manly fellow. His father was the notorious Sir JabezGilchrist, who ruined himself on the turf. My scholar has been leftvery poor, but he is hard-working and industrious. He will do well.
"The second floor is inhabited by Daulat Ras, the Indian. He is aquiet, inscrutable fellow, as most of those Indians are. He is wellup in his work, though his Greek is his weak subject. He is steadyand methodical.
"The top floor belongs to Miles McLaren. He is a brilliant fellowwhen he chooses to work--one of the brightest intellects of theUniversity, but he is wayward, dissipated, and unprincipled. He wasnearly expelled over a card scandal in his first year. He has beenidling all this term, and he must look forward with dread to theexamination."
"Then it is he whom you suspect?"
"I dare not go so far as that. But of the three he is perhaps theleast unlikely."
"Exactly. Now, Mr. Soames, let us have a look at your servant,Bannister."
He was a little, white-faced, clean-shaven, grizzly-haired fellow offifty. He was still suffering from this sudden disturbance of thequiet routine of his life. His plump face was twitching with hisnervousness, and his fingers could not keep still.
"We are investigating this unhappy business, Bannister," said hismaster.
"Yes, sir."
"I understand," said Holmes, "that you left your key in the door?"
"Yes, sir."
"Was it not very extraordinary that you should do this on the veryday when there were these papers inside?"
"It was most unfortunate, sir. But I have occasionally done the samething at other times."
"When did you enter the room?"
"It was about half-past four. That is Mr. Soames's tea time."
"How long did you stay?"
"When I saw that he was absent I withdrew at once."
"Did you look at these papers on the table?"
"No, sir; certainly not."
"How came you to leave the key in the door?"
"I had the tea-tray in my hand. I thought I would come back for thekey. Then I forgot."
"Has the outer door a spring lock?"
"No, sir."
"Then it was open all the time?"
"Yes, sir."
"Anyone in the room could get out?"
"Yes, sir."
"When Mr. Soames returned and called for you, you were very muchdisturbed?"
"Yes, sir. Such a thing has never happened during the many years thatI have been here. I nearly fainted, sir."
"So I understand. Where were you when you began to feel bad?"
"Where was I, sir? Why, here, near the door."
"That is singular, because you sat down in that chair over yondernear the corner. Why did you pass these other chairs?"
"I don't know, sir. It didn't matter to me where I sat."
"I really don't think he knew much about it, Mr. Holmes. He waslooking very bad--quite ghastly."
"You stayed here when your master left?"
"Only for a minute or so. Then I locked the door and went to myroom."
"Whom do you suspect?"
"Oh, I would not venture to say, sir. I don't believe there is anygentleman in this University who is capable of profiting by such anaction. No, sir, I'll not believe it."
"Thank you; that will do," said Holmes. "Oh, one more word. You havenot mentioned to any of the three gentlemen whom you attend thatanything is amiss?"
"No, sir; not a word."
"You haven't seen any of them?"
"No, sir."
"Very good. Now, Mr. Soames, we will take a walk in the quadrangle,if you please."
Three yellow squares of light shone above us in the gathering gloom.
"Your three birds are all in their nests," said Holmes, looking up."Halloa! What's that? One of them seems restless enough."
It was the Indian, whose dark silhouette appeared suddenly upon hisblind. He was pacing swiftly up and down his room.
"I should like to have a peep at each of them," said Holmes. "Is itpossible?"
"No difficulty in the world," Soames answered. "This set of rooms isquite the oldest in the college, and it is not unusual for visitorsto go over them. Come along, and I will personally conduct you."
"No names, please!" said Holmes, as we knocked at Gilchrist's door. Atall, flaxen-haired, slim young fellow opened it, and made us welcomewhen he understood our errand. There were some really curious piecesof mediaeval domestic architecture within. Holmes was so charmed withone of them that he insisted on drawing it on his note-book, brokehis pencil, had to borrow one from our host, and finally borrowed aknife to sharpen his own. The same curious accident happened to himin the rooms of the Indian--a silent, little, hook-nosed fellow, whoeyed us askance and was obviously glad when Holmes's architecturalstudies had come to an end. I could not see that in either caseHolmes had come upon the clue for which he was searching. Only at thethird did our visit prove abortive. The outer door would not open toour knock, and nothing more substantial than a torrent of badlanguage came from behind it. "I don't care who you are. You can goto blazes!" roared the angry voice. "To-morrow's the exam, and Iwon't be drawn by anyone."
"A rude fellow," said our guide, flushing with anger as we withdrewdown the stair. "Of course, he did not realize that it was I who wasknocking, but none the less his conduct was very uncourteous, and,indeed, under the circumstances rather suspicious."
Holmes's response was a curious one.
"Can you tell me his exact height?" he asked.
"Really, Mr. Holmes, I cannot undertake to say. He is taller than theIndian, not so tall as Gilchrist. I suppose five foot six would beabout it."
"That is very important," said Holmes. "And now, Mr. Soames, I wishyou good-night."
Our guide cried aloud in his astonishment and dismay. "Good gracious,Mr. Holmes, you are surely not going to leave me in this abruptfashion! You don't seem to realize the position. To-morrow is theexamination. I must take some definite action to-night. I cannotallow the examination to be held if one of the papers has beentampered with. The situation must be faced."
"You must leave it as it is. I shall drop round early to-morrowmorning and chat the matter over. It is possible that I may be in aposition then to indicate some course of action. Meanwhile you changenothing--nothing at all."
"Very good, Mr. Holmes."
"You can be perfectly easy in your mind. We shall certainly find someway out of your difficulties. I will take the black clay with me,also the pencil cuttings. Good-bye."
When we were out in the darkness of the quadrangle we again looked upat the windows. The Indian still paced his room. The others wereinvisible.
"Well, Watson, what do you think of it?" Holmes asked, as we came outinto the main street. "Quite a little parlour game--sort ofthree-card trick, is it not? There are your three men. It must be oneof them. You take your choice. Which is yours?"
"The foul-mouthed fellow at the top. He is the one with the worstrecord. And yet that Indian was a sly fellow also. Why should he bepacing his room all the time?"
"There is nothing in that. Many men do it when they are trying tolearn anything by heart."
"He looked at us in a queer way."
"So would you if a flock of strangers came in on you when you werepreparing for an examination next day, and every moment was of value.No, I see nothing in that. Pencils, too, and knives--all wassatisfactory. But that fellow does puzzle me."
"Who?"
"Why, Bannister, the servant. What's his game in the matter?"
"He impressed me as being a perfectly honest man."
"So he did me. That's the puzzling part. Why should a perfectlyhonest man--well, well, here's a large stationer's. We shall beginour researches here."
There were only four stationers of any consequence in the town, andat each Holmes produced his pencil chips and bid high for aduplicate. All were agreed that one could be ordered, but that it wasnot a usual size of pencil and that it was seldom kept in stock. Myfriend did not appear to be depressed by his failure, but shruggedhis shoulders in half-humorous resignation.
"No good, my dear Watson. This, the best and only final clue, has runto nothing. But, indeed, I have little doubt that we can build up asufficient case without it. By Jove! my dear fellow, it is nearlynine, and the landlady babbled of green peas at seven-thirty. Whatwith your eternal tobacco, Watson, and your irregularity at meals, Iexpect that you will get notice to quit and that I shall share yourdownfall--not, however, before we have solved the problem of thenervous tutor, the careless servant, and the three enterprisingstudents."
 Holmes made no further allusion to the matter that day, though hesat lost in thought for a long time after our belated dinner. Ateight in the morning he came into my room just as I finished mytoilet.
"Well, Watson," said he, "it is time we went down to St. Luke's. Canyou do without breakfast?"
"Certainly."
"Soames will be in a dreadful fidget until we are able to tell himsomething positive."
"Have you anything positive to tell him?"
"I think so."
"You have formed a conclusion?"
"Yes, my dear Watson; I have solved the mystery."
"But what fresh evidence could you have got?"
"Aha! It is not for nothing that I have turned myself out of bed atthe untimely hour of six. I have put in two hours' hard work andcovered at least five miles, with something to show for it. Look atthat!"
He held out his hand. On the palm were three little pyramids ofblack, doughy clay.
"Why, Holmes, you had only two yesterday!"
"And one more this morning. It is a fair argument that wherever No. 3came from is also the source of Nos. 1 and 2. Eh, Watson? Well, comealong and put friend Soames out of his pain."
 The unfortunate tutor was certainly in a state of pitiable agitationwhen we found him in his chambers. In a few hours the examinationwould commence, and he was still in the dilemma between making thefacts public and allowing the culprit to compete for the valuablescholarship. He could hardly stand still, so great was his mentalagitation, and he ran towards Holmes with two eager handsoutstretched.
"Thank Heaven that you have come! I feared that you had given it upin despair. What am I to do? Shall the examination proceed?"
"Yes; let it proceed by all means."
"But this rascal--?"
"He shall not compete."
"You know him?"
"I think so. If this matter is not to become public we must giveourselves certain powers, and resolve ourselves into a small privatecourt-martial. You there, if you please, Soames! Watson, you here!I'll take the arm-chair in the middle. I think that we are nowsufficiently imposing to strike terror into a guilty breast. Kindlyring the bell!"
Bannister entered, and shrunk back in evident surprise and fear atour judicial appearance.
"You will kindly close the door," said Holmes. "Now, Bannister, willyou please tell us the truth about yesterday's incident?"
The man turned white to the roots of his hair.
"I have told you everything, sir."
"Nothing to add?"
"Nothing at all, sir."
"Well, then, I must make some suggestions to you. When you sat downon that chair yesterday, did you do so in order to conceal someobject which would have shown who had been in the room?"
Bannister's face was ghastly.
"No, sir; certainly not."
"It is only a suggestion," said Holmes, suavely. "I frankly admitthat I am unable to prove it. But it seems probable enough, since themoment that Mr. Soames's back was turned you released the man who washiding in that bedroom."
Bannister licked his dry lips.
"There was no man, sir."
"Ah, that's a pity, Bannister. Up to now you may have spoken thetruth, but now I know that you have lied."
The man's face set in sullen defiance.
"There was no man, sir."
"Come, come, Bannister!"
"No, sir; there was no one."
"In that case you can give us no further information. Would youplease remain in the room? Stand over there near the bedroom door.Now, Soames, I am going to ask you to have the great kindness to goup to the room of young Gilchrist, and to ask him to step down intoyours."
An instant later the tutor returned, bringing with him the student.He was a fine figure of a man, tall, lithe, and agile, with a springystep and a pleasant, open face. His troubled blue eyes glanced ateach of us, and finally rested with an expression of blank dismayupon Bannister in the farther corner.
"Just close the door," said Holmes. "Now, Mr. Gilchrist, we are allquite alone here, and no one need ever know one word of what passesbetween us. We can be perfectly frank with each other. We want toknow, Mr. Gilchrist, how you, an honourable man, ever came to commitsuch an action as that of yesterday?"
The unfortunate young man staggered back and cast a look full ofhorror and reproach at Bannister.
"No, no, Mr. Gilchrist, sir; I never said a word--never one word!"cried the servant.
"No, but you have now," said Holmes. "Now, sir, you must see thatafter Bannister's words your position is hopeless, and that your onlychance lies in a frank confession."
For a moment Gilchrist, with upraised hand, tried to control hiswrithing features. The next he had thrown himself on his knees besidethe table and, burying his face in his hands, he had burst into astorm of passionate sobbing.
"Come, come," said Holmes, kindly; "it is human to err, and at leastno one can accuse you of being a callous criminal. Perhaps it wouldbe easier for you if I were to tell Mr. Soames what occurred, and youcan check me where I am wrong. Shall I do so? Well, well, don'ttrouble to answer. Listen, and see that I do you no injustice.
"From the moment, Mr. Soames, that you said to me that no one, noteven Bannister, could have told that the papers were in your room,the case began to take a definite shape in my mind. The printer onecould, of course, dismiss. He could examine the papers in his ownoffice. The Indian I also thought nothing of. If the proofs were in aroll he could not possibly know what they were. On the other hand, itseemed an unthinkable coincidence that a man should dare to enter theroom, and that by chance on that very day the papers were on thetable. I dismissed that. The man who entered knew that the paperswere there. How did he know?
"When I approached your room I examined the window. You amused me bysupposing that I was contemplating the possibility of someone havingin broad daylight, under the eyes of all these opposite rooms, forcedhimself through it. Such an idea was absurd. I was measuring how talla man would need to be in order to see as he passed what papers wereon the central table. I am six feet high, and I could do it with aneffort. No one less than that would have a chance. Already you see Ihad reason to think that if one of your three students was a man ofunusual height he was the most worth watching of the three.
"I entered and I took you into my confidence as to the suggestions ofthe side table. Of the centre table I could make nothing, until inyour description of Gilchrist you mentioned that he was along-distance jumper. Then the whole thing came to me in an instant,and I only needed certain corroborative proofs, which I speedilyobtained.
"What happened was this. This young fellow had employed his afternoonat the athletic grounds, where he had been practising the jump. Hereturned carrying his jumping shoes, which are provided, as you areaware, with several sharp spikes. As he passed your window he saw, bymeans of his great height, these proofs upon your table, andconjectured what they were. No harm would have been done had it notbeen that as he passed your door he perceived the key which had beenleft by the carelessness of your servant. A sudden impulse came overhim to enter and see if they were indeed the proofs. It was not adangerous exploit, for he could always pretend that he had simplylooked in to ask a question.
"Well, when he saw that they were indeed the proofs, it was then thathe yielded to temptation. He put his shoes on the table. What was ityou put on that chair near the window?"
"Gloves," said the young man.
Holmes looked triumphantly at Bannister. "He put his gloves on thechair, and he took the proofs, sheet by sheet, to copy them. Hethought the tutor must return by the main gate, and that he would seehim. As we know, he came back by the side gate. Suddenly he heard himat the very door. There was no possible escape. He forgot his gloves,but he caught up his shoes and darted into the bedroom. You observethat the scratch on that table is slight at one side, but deepens inthe direction of the bedroom door. That in itself is enough to showus that the shoe had been drawn in that direction and that theculprit had taken refuge there. The earth round the spike had beenleft on the table, and a second sample was loosened and fell in thebedroom. I may add that I walked out to the athletic grounds thismorning, saw that tenacious black clay is used in the jumping-pit,and carried away a specimen of it, together with some of the fine tanor sawdust which is strewn over it to prevent the athlete fromslipping. Have I told the truth, Mr. Gilchrist?"
The student had drawn himself erect.
"Yes, sir, it is true," said he.
"Good heavens, have you nothing to add?" cried Soames.
"Yes, sir, I have, but the shock of this disgraceful exposure hasbewildered me. I have a letter here, Mr. Soames, which I wrote to youearly this morning in the middle of a restless night. It was before Iknew that my sin had found me out. Here it is, sir. You will see thatI have said, 'I have determined not to go in for the examination. Ihave been offered a commission in the Rhodesian Police, and I amgoing out to South Africa at once.'"
"I am indeed pleased to hear that you did not intend to profit byyour unfair advantage," said Soames. "But why did you change yourpurpose?"
Gilchrist pointed to Bannister.
"There is the man who set me in the right path," said he.
"Come now, Bannister," said Holmes. "It will be clear to you fromwhat I have said that only you could have let this young man out,since you were left in the room, and must have locked the door whenyou went out. As to his escaping by that window, it was incredible.Can you not clear up the last point in this mystery, and tell us thereasons for your action?"
"It was simple enough, sir, if you only had known; but with all yourcleverness it was impossible that you could know. Time was, sir, whenI was butler to old Sir Jabez Gilchrist, this young gentleman'sfather. When he was ruined I came to the college as servant, but Inever forgot my old employer because he was down in the world. Iwatched his son all I could for the sake of the old days. Well, sir,when I came into this room yesterday when the alarm was given, thevery first thing I saw was Mr. Gilchrist's tan gloves a-lying in thatchair. I knew those gloves well, and I understood their message. IfMr. Soames saw them the game was up. I flopped down into that chair,and nothing would budge me until Mr. Soames he went for you. Then outcame my poor young master, whom I had dandled on my knee, andconfessed it all to me. Wasn't it natural, sir, that I should savehim, and wasn't it natural also that I should try to speak to him ashis dead father would have done, and make him understand that hecould not profit by such a deed? Could you blame me, sir?"
"No, indeed," said Holmes, heartily, springing to his feet. "Well,Soames, I think we have cleared your little problem up, and ourbreakfast awaits us at home. Come, Watson! As to you, sir, I trustthat a bright future awaits you in Rhodesia. For once you have fallenlow. Let us see in the future how high you can rise."





                 THE ADVENTURE OF THE GOLDEN PINCE-NEZ
When I look at the three massive manuscript volumes which contain ourwork for the year 1894 I confess that it is very difficult for me,out of such a wealth of material, to select the cases which are mostinteresting in themselves and at the same time most conducive to adisplay of those peculiar powers for which my friend was famous. As Iturn over the pages I see my notes upon the repulsive story of thered leech and the terrible death of Crosby the banker. Here also Ifind an account of the Addleton tragedy and the singular contents ofthe ancient British barrow. The famous Smith-Mortimer succession casecomes also within this period, and so does the tracking and arrest ofHuret, the Boulevard assassin--an exploit which won for Holmes anautograph letter of thanks from the French President and the Order ofthe Legion of Honour. Each of these would furnish a narrative, but onthe whole I am of opinion that none of them unite so many singularpoints of interest as the episode of Yoxley Old Place, which includesnot only the lamentable death of young Willoughby Smith, but alsothose subsequent developments which threw so curious a light upon thecauses of the crime.
It was a wild, tempestuous night towards the close of November.Holmes and I sat together in silence all the evening, he engaged witha powerful lens deciphering the remains of the original inscriptionupon a palimpsest, I deep in a recent treatise upon surgery. Outsidethe wind howled down Baker Street, while the rain beat fiercelyagainst the windows. It was strange there in the very depths of thetown, with ten miles of man's handiwork on every side of us, to feelthe iron grip of Nature, and to be conscious that to the hugeelemental forces all London was no more than the molehills that dotthe fields. I walked to the window and looked out on the desertedstreet. The occasional lamps gleamed on the expanse of muddy road andshining pavement. A single cab was splashing its way from the OxfordStreet end.
"Well, Watson, it's as well we have not to turn out to-night," saidHolmes, laying aside his lens and rolling up the palimpsest. "I'vedone enough for one sitting. It is trying work for the eyes. So faras I can make out it is nothing more exciting than an Abbey'saccounts dating from the second half of the fifteenth century.Halloa! halloa! halloa! What's this?"
Amid the droning of the wind there had come the stamping of a horse'shoofs and the long grind of a wheel as it rasped against the kerb.The cab which I had seen had pulled up at our door.
"What can he want?" I ejaculated, as a man stepped out of it.
"Want! He wants us. And we, my poor Watson, want overcoats andcravats and galoshes, and every aid that man ever invented to fightthe weather. Wait a bit, though! There's the cab off again! There'shope yet. He'd have kept it if he had wanted us to come. Run down, mydear fellow, and open the door, for all virtuous folk have been longin bed."
When the light of the hall lamp fell upon our midnight visitor I hadno difficulty in recognising him. It was young Stanley Hopkins, apromising detective, in whose career Holmes had several times shown avery practical interest.
"Is he in?" he asked, eagerly.
"Come up, my dear sir," said Holmes's voice from above. "I hope youhave no designs upon us on such a night as this."
The detective mounted the stairs, and our lamp gleamed upon hisshining waterproof. I helped him out of it while Holmes knocked ablaze out of the logs in the grate.
"Now, my dear Hopkins, draw up and warm your toes," said he. "Here'sa cigar, and the doctor has a prescription containing hot water and alemon which is good medicine on a night like this. It must besomething important which has brought you out in such a gale."
"It is indeed, Mr. Holmes. I've had a bustling afternoon, I promiseyou. Did you see anything of the Yoxley case in the latest editions?"
"I've seen nothing later than the fifteenth century to-day."
"Well, it was only a paragraph, and all wrong at that, so you havenot missed anything. I haven't let the grass grow under my feet. It'sdown in Kent, seven miles from Chatham and three from the railwayline. I was wired for at three-fifteen, reached Yoxley Old Place atfive, conducted my investigation, was back at Charing Cross by thelast train, and straight to you by cab."
"Which means, I suppose, that you are not quite clear about yourcase?"
"It means that I can make neither head nor tail of it. So far as Ican see it is just as tangled a business as ever I handled, and yetat first it seemed so simple that one couldn't go wrong. There's nomotive, Mr. Holmes. That's what bothers me--I can't put my hand on amotive. Here's a man dead--there's no denying that--but, so far as Ican see, no reason on earth why anyone should wish him harm."
Holmes lit his cigar and leaned back in his chair.
"Let us hear about it," said he.
"I've got my facts pretty clear," said Stanley Hopkins. "All I wantnow is to know what they all mean. The story, so far as I can make itout, is like this. Some years ago this country house, Yoxley OldPlace, was taken by an elderly man, who gave the name of ProfessorCoram. He was an invalid, keeping his bed half the time, and theother half hobbling round the house with a stick or being pushedabout the grounds by the gardener in a bath-chair. He was well likedby the few neighbours who called upon him, and he has the reputationdown there of being a very learned man. His household used to consistof an elderly housekeeper, Mrs. Marker, and of a maid, Susan Tarlton.These have both been with him since his arrival, and they seem to bewomen of excellent character. The Professor is writing a learnedbook, and he found it necessary about a year ago to engage asecretary. The first two that he tried were not successes; but thethird, Mr. Willoughby Smith, a very young man straight from theUniversity, seems to have been just what his employer wanted. Hiswork consisted in writing all the morning to the Professor'sdictation, and he usually spent the evening in hunting up referencesand passages which bore upon the next day's work. This WilloughbySmith has nothing against him either as a boy at Uppingham or as ayoung man at Cambridge. I have seen his testimonials, and from thefirst he was a decent, quiet, hardworking fellow, with no weak spotin him at all. And yet this is the lad who has met his death thismorning in the Professor's study under circumstances which can pointonly to murder."
The wind howled and screamed at the windows. Holmes and I drew closerto the fire while the young inspector slowly and point by pointdeveloped his singular narrative.
"If you were to search all England," said he, "I don't suppose youcould find a household more self-contained or free from outsideinfluences. Whole weeks would pass and not one of them go past thegarden gate. The Professor was buried in his work and existed fornothing else. Young Smith knew nobody in the neighbourhood, and livedvery much as his employer did. The two women had nothing to take themfrom the house. Mortimer the gardener, who wheels the bath-chair, isan Army pensioner--an old Crimean man of excellent character. He doesnot live in the house, but in a three-roomed cottage at the other endof the garden. Those are the only people that you would find withinthe grounds of Yoxley Old Place. At the same time, the gate of thegarden is a hundred yards from the main London to Chatham road. Itopens with a latch, and there is nothing to prevent anyone fromwalking in.
"Now I will give you the evidence of Susan Tarlton, who is the onlyperson who can say anything positive about the matter. It was in theforenoon, between eleven and twelve. She was engaged at the moment inhanging some curtains in the upstairs front bedroom. Professor Coramwas still in bed, for when the weather is bad he seldom rises beforemidday. The housekeeper was busied with some work in the back of thehouse. Willoughby Smith had been in his bedroom, which he uses as asitting-room; but the maid heard him at that moment pass along thepassage and descend to the study immediately below her. She did notsee him, but she says that she could not be mistaken in his quick,firm tread. She did not hear the study door close, but a minute or solater there was a dreadful cry in the room below. It was a wild,hoarse scream, so strange and unnatural that it might have comeeither from a man or a woman. At the same instant there was a heavythud, which shook the old house, and then all was silence. The maidstood petrified for a moment, and then, recovering her courage, sheran downstairs. The study door was shut, and she opened it. Insideyoung Mr. Willoughby Smith was stretched upon the floor. At first shecould see no injury, but as she tried to raise him she saw that bloodwas pouring from the underside of his neck. It was pierced by a verysmall but very deep wound, which had divided the carotid artery. Theinstrument with which the injury had been inflicted lay upon thecarpet beside him. It was one of those small sealing-wax knives to befound on old-fashioned writing-tables, with an ivory handle and astiff blade. It was part of the fittings of the Professor's own desk.
"At first the maid thought that young Smith was already dead, but onpouring some water from the carafe over his forehead he opened hiseyes for an instant. 'The Professor,' he murmured--'it was she.' Themaid is prepared to swear that those were the exact words. He trieddesperately to say something else, and he held his right hand up inthe air. Then he fell back dead.
"In the meantime the housekeeper had also arrived upon the scene, butshe was just too late to catch the young man's dying words. LeavingSusan with the body, she hurried to the Professor's room. He wassitting up in bed horribly agitated, for he had heard enough toconvince him that something terrible had occurred. Mrs. Marker isprepared to swear that the Professor was still in his night-clothes,and, indeed, it was impossible for him to dress without the help ofMortimer, whose orders were to come at twelve o'clock. The Professordeclares that he heard the distant cry, but that he knows nothingmore. He can give no explanation of the young man's last words, 'TheProfessor--it was she,' but imagines that they were the outcome ofdelirium. He believes that Willoughby Smith had not an enemy in theworld, and can give no reason for the crime. His first action was tosend Mortimer the gardener for the local police. A little later thechief constable sent for me. Nothing was moved before I got there,and strict orders were given that no one should walk upon the pathsleading to the house. It was a splendid chance of putting yourtheories into practice, Mr. Sherlock Holmes. There was really nothingwanting."
"Except Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said my companion, with a somewhatbitter smile. "Well, let us hear about it. What sort of job did youmake of it?"
"I must ask you first, Mr. Holmes, to glance at this rough plan,which will give you a general idea of the position of the Professor'sstudy and the various points of the case. It will help you infollowing my investigation."
He unfolded the rough chart, which I here reproduce, and he laid itacross Holmes's knee. I rose, and, standing behind Holmes, I studiedit over his shoulder.
[ Picture: Sketch of the building's room and corridors ]
"It is very rough, of course, and it only deals with the points whichseem to me to be essential. All the rest you will see later foryourself. Now, first of all, presuming that the assassin entered thehouse, how did he or she come in? Undoubtedly by the garden path andthe back door, from which there is direct access to the study. Anyother way would have been exceedingly complicated. The escape musthave also been made along that line, for of the two other exits fromthe room one was blocked by Susan as she ran downstairs and the otherleads straight to the Professor's bedroom. I therefore directed myattention at once to the garden path, which was saturated with recentrain and would certainly show any footmarks.
"My examination showed me that I was dealing with a cautious andexpert criminal. No footmarks were to be found on the path. Therecould be no question, however, that someone had passed along thegrass border which lines the path, and that he had done so in orderto avoid leaving a track. I could not find anything in the nature ofa distinct impression, but the grass was trodden down and someone hadundoubtedly passed. It could only have been the murderer, sinceneither the gardener nor anyone else had been there that morning andthe rain had only begun during the night."
"One moment," said Holmes. "Where does this path lead to?"
"To the road."
"How long is it?"
"A hundred yards or so."
"At the point where the path passes through the gate you could surelypick up the tracks?"
"Unfortunately, the path was tiled at that point."
"Well, on the road itself?"
"No; it was all trodden into mire."
"Tut-tut! Well, then, these tracks upon the grass, were they comingor going?"
"It was impossible to say. There was never any outline."
"A large foot or a small?"
"You could not distinguish."
Holmes gave an ejaculation of impatience.
"It has been pouring rain and blowing a hurricane ever since," saidhe. "It will be harder to read now than that palimpsest. Well, well,it can't be helped. What did you do, Hopkins, after you had madecertain that you had made certain of nothing?"
"I think I made certain of a good deal, Mr. Holmes. I knew thatsomeone had entered the house cautiously from without. I nextexamined the corridor. It is lined with cocoanut matting and hadtaken no impression of any kind. This brought me into the studyitself. It is a scantily-furnished room. The main article is a largewriting-table with a fixed bureau. This bureau consists of a doublecolumn of drawers with a central small cupboard between them. Thedrawers were open, the cupboard locked. The drawers, it seems, werealways open, and nothing of value was kept in them. There were somepapers of importance in the cupboard, but there were no signs thatthis had been tampered with, and the Professor assures me thatnothing was missing. It is certain that no robbery has beencommitted.
"I come now to the body of the young man. It was found near thebureau, and just to the left of it, as marked upon that chart. Thestab was on the right side of the neck and from behind forwards, sothat it is almost impossible that it could have been self-inflicted."
"Unless he fell upon the knife," said Holmes.
"Exactly. The idea crossed my mind. But we found the knife some feetaway from the body, so that seems impossible. Then, of course, thereare the man's own dying words. And, finally, there was this veryimportant piece of evidence which was found clasped in the dead man'sright hand."
From his pocket Stanley Hopkins drew a small paper packet. Heunfolded it and disclosed a golden pince-nez, with two broken ends ofblack silk cord dangling from the end of it. "Willoughby Smith hadexcellent sight," he added. "There can be no question that this wassnatched from the face or the person of the assassin."
Sherlock Holmes took the glasses into his hand and examined them withthe utmost attention and interest. He held them on his nose,endeavoured to read through them, went to the window and stared upthe street with them, looked at them most minutely in the full lightof the lamp, and finally, with a chuckle, seated himself at the tableand wrote a few lines upon a sheet of paper, which he tossed acrossto Stanley Hopkins.
"That's the best I can do for you," said he. "It may prove to be ofsome use."
The astonished detective read the note aloud. It ran as follows:
"Wanted, a woman of good address, attired like a lady. She has aremarkably thick nose, with eyes which are set close upon either sideof it. She has a puckered forehead, a peering expression, andprobably rounded shoulders. There are indications that she has hadrecourse to an optician at least twice during the last few months. Asher glasses are of remarkable strength and as opticians are not verynumerous, there should be no difficulty in tracing her."
Holmes smiled at the astonishment of Hopkins, which must have beenreflected upon my features.
"Surely my deductions are simplicity itself," said he. "It would bedifficult to name any articles which afford a finer field forinference than a pair of glasses, especially so remarkable a pair asthese. That they belong to a woman I infer from their delicacy, andalso, of course, from the last words of the dying man. As to herbeing a person of refinement and well dressed, they are, as youperceive, handsomely mounted in solid gold, and it is inconceivablethat anyone who wore such glasses could be slatternly in otherrespects. You will find that the clips are too wide for your nose,showing that the lady's nose was very broad at the base. This sort ofnose is usually a short and coarse one, but there are a sufficientnumber of exceptions to prevent me from being dogmatic or frominsisting upon this point in my description. My own face is a narrowone, and yet I find that I cannot get my eyes into the centre, ornear the centre, of these glasses. Therefore the lady's eyes are setvery near to the sides of the nose. You will perceive, Watson, thatthe glasses are concave and of unusual strength. A lady whose visionhas been so extremely contracted all her life is sure to have thephysical characteristics of such vision, which are seen in theforehead, the eyelids, and the shoulders."
"Yes," I said, "I can follow each of your arguments. I confess,however, that I am unable to understand how you arrive at the doublevisit to the optician."
Holmes took the glasses in his hand.
"You will perceive," he said, "that the clips are lined with tinybands of cork to soften the pressure upon the nose. One of these isdiscoloured and worn to some slight extent, but the other is new.Evidently one has fallen off and been replaced. I should judge thatthe older of them has not been there more than a few months. Theyexactly correspond, so I gather that the lady went back to the sameestablishment for the second."
"By George, it's marvellous!" cried Hopkins, in an ecstasy ofadmiration. "To think that I had all that evidence in my hand andnever knew it! I had intended, however, to go the round of the Londonopticians."
"Of course you would. Meanwhile, have you anything more to tell usabout the case?"
"Nothing, Mr. Holmes. I think that you know as much as I donow--probably more. We have had inquiries made as to any strangerseen on the country roads or at the railway station. We have heard ofnone. What beats me is the utter want of all object in the crime. Nota ghost of a motive can anyone suggest."
"Ah! there I am not in a position to help you. But I suppose you wantus to come out to-morrow?"
"If it is not asking too much, Mr. Holmes. There's a train fromCharing Cross to Chatham at six in the morning, and we should be atYoxley Old Place between eight and nine."
"Then we shall take it. Your case has certainly some features ofgreat interest, and I shall be delighted to look into it. Well, it'snearly one, and we had best get a few hours' sleep. I dare say youcan manage all right on the sofa in front of the fire. I'll light myspirit-lamp and give you a cup of coffee before we start."
The gale had blown itself out next day, but it was a bitter morningwhen we started upon our journey. We saw the cold winter sun riseover the dreary marshes of the Thames and the long, sullen reaches ofthe river, which I shall ever associate with our pursuit of theAndaman Islander in the earlier days of our career. After a long andweary journey we alighted at a small station some miles from Chatham.While a horse was being put into a trap at the local inn we snatcheda hurried breakfast, and so we were all ready for business when we atlast arrived at Yoxley Old Place. A constable met us at the gardengate.
"Well, Wilson, any news?"
"No, sir, nothing."
"No reports of any stranger seen?"
"No, sir. Down at the station they are certain that no strangereither came or went yesterday."
"Have you had inquiries made at inns and lodgings?"
"Yes, sir; there is no one that we cannot account for."
"Well, it's only a reasonable walk to Chatham. Anyone might staythere, or take a train without being observed. This is the gardenpath of which I spoke, Mr. Holmes. I'll pledge my word there was nomark on it yesterday."
"On which side were the marks on the grass?"
"This side, sir. This narrow margin of grass between the path and theflower-bed. I can't see the traces now, but they were clear to methen."
"Yes, yes; someone has passed along," said Holmes, stooping over thegrass border. "Our lady must have picked her steps carefully, mustshe not, since on the one side she would leave a track on the path,and on the other an even clearer one on the soft bed?"
"Yes, sir, she must have been a cool hand."
I saw an intent look pass over Holmes's face.
"You say that she must have come back this way?"
"Yes, sir; there is no other."
"On this strip of grass?"
"Certainly, Mr. Holmes."
"Hum! It was a very remarkable performance--very remarkable. Well, Ithink we have exhausted the path. Let us go farther. This garden dooris usually kept open, I suppose? Then this visitor had nothing to dobut to walk in. The idea of murder was not in her mind, or she wouldhave provided herself with some sort of weapon, instead of having topick this knife off the writing-table. She advanced along thiscorridor, leaving no traces upon the cocoanut matting. Then she foundherself in this study. How long was she there? We have no means ofjudging."
"Not more than a few minutes, sir. I forgot to tell you that Mrs.Marker, the housekeeper, had been in there tidying not very longbefore--about a quarter of an hour, she says."
"Well, that gives us a limit. Our lady enters this room and what doesshe do? She goes over to the writing-table. What for? Not foranything in the drawers. If there had been anything worth her takingit would surely have been locked up. No; it was for something in thatwooden bureau. Halloa! what is that scratch upon the face of it? Justhold a match, Watson. Why did you not tell me of this, Hopkins?"
The mark which he was examining began upon the brass work on theright-hand side of the keyhole, and extended for about four inches,where it had scratched the varnish from the surface.
"I noticed it, Mr. Holmes. But you'll always find scratches round akeyhole."
"This is recent, quite recent. See how the brass shines where it iscut. An old scratch would be the same colour as the surface. Look atit through my lens. There's the varnish, too, like earth on each sideof a furrow. Is Mrs. Marker there?"
A sad-faced, elderly woman came into the room.
"Did you dust this bureau yesterday morning?"
"Yes, sir."
"Did you notice this scratch?"
"No, sir, I did not."
"I am sure you did not, for a duster would have swept away theseshreds of varnish. Who has the key of this bureau?"
"The Professor keeps it on his watch-chain."
"Is it a simple key?"
"No, sir; it is a Chubb's key."
"Very good. Mrs. Marker, you can go. Now we are making a littleprogress. Our lady enters the room, advances to the bureau, andeither opens it or tries to do so. While she is thus engaged youngWilloughby Smith enters the room. In her hurry to withdraw the keyshe makes this scratch upon the door. He seizes her, and she,snatching up the nearest object, which happens to be this knife,strikes at him in order to make him let go his hold. The blow is afatal one. He falls and she escapes, either with or without theobject for which she has come. Is Susan the maid there? Could anyonehave got away through that door after the time that you heard thecry, Susan?"
"No sir; it is impossible. Before I got down the stair I'd have seenanyone in the passage. Besides, the door never opened, for I wouldhave heard it."
"That settles this exit. Then no doubt the lady went out the way shecame. I understand that this other passage leads only to theProfessor's room. There is no exit that way?"
"No, sir."
"We shall go down it and make the acquaintance of the Professor.Halloa, Hopkins! this is very important, very important indeed. TheProfessor's corridor is also lined with cocoanut matting."
"Well, sir, what of that?"
"Don't you see any bearing upon the case? Well, well, I don't insistupon it. No doubt I am wrong. And yet it seems to me to besuggestive. Come with me and introduce me."
We passed down the passage, which was of the same length as thatwhich led to the garden. At the end was a short flight of stepsending in a door. Our guide knocked, and then ushered us into theProfessor's bedroom.
It was a very large chamber, lined with innumerable volumes, whichhad overflowed from the shelves and lay in piles in the corners, orwere stacked all round at the base of the cases. The bed was in thecentre of the room, and in it, propped up with pillows, was the ownerof the house. I have seldom seen a more remarkable-looking person. Itwas a gaunt, aquiline face which was turned towards us, with piercingdark eyes, which lurked in deep hollows under overhung and tuftedbrows. His hair and beard were white, save that the latter wascuriously stained with yellow around his mouth. A cigarette glowedamid the tangle of white hair, and the air of the room was fetid withstale tobacco-smoke. As he held out his hand to Holmes I perceivedthat it also was stained yellow with nicotine.
"A smoker, Mr. Holmes?" said he, speaking well-chosen English with acurious little mincing accent. "Pray take a cigarette. And you, sir?I can recommend them, for I have them especially prepared by Ionidesof Alexandria. He sends me a thousand at a time, and I grieve to saythat I have to arrange for a fresh supply every fortnight. Bad, sir,very bad, but an old man has few pleasures. Tobacco and my work--thatis all that is left to me."
Holmes had lit a cigarette, and was shooting little darting glancesall over the room.
"Tobacco and my work, but now only tobacco," the old man exclaimed."Alas! what a fatal interruption! Who could have foreseen such aterrible catastrophe? So estimable a young man! I assure you thatafter a few months' training he was an admirable assistant. What doyou think of the matter, Mr. Holmes?"
"I have not yet made up my mind."
"I shall indeed be indebted to you if you can throw a light where allis so dark to us. To a poor bookworm and invalid like myself such ablow is paralyzing. I seem to have lost the faculty of thought. Butyou are a man of action--you are a man of affairs. It is part of theeveryday routine of your life. You can preserve your balance in everyemergency. We are fortunate indeed in having you at our side."
Holmes was pacing up and down one side of the room whilst the oldProfessor was talking. I observed that he was smoking withextraordinary rapidity. It was evident that he shared our host'sliking for the fresh Alexandrian cigarettes.
"Yes, sir, it is a crushing blow," said the old man. "That is mymagnum opus--the pile of papers on the side table yonder. It is myanalysis of the documents found in the Coptic monasteries of Syriaand Egypt, a work which will cut deep at the very foundations ofrevealed religion. With my enfeebled health I do not know whether Ishall ever be able to complete it now that my assistant has beentaken from me. Dear me, Mr. Holmes; why, you are even a quickersmoker than I am myself."
Holmes smiled.
"I am a connoisseur," said he, taking another cigarette from thebox--his fourth--and lighting it from the stub of that which he hadfinished. "I will not trouble you with any lengthy cross-examination,Professor Coram, since I gather that you were in bed at the time ofthe crime and could know nothing about it. I would only ask this.What do you imagine that this poor fellow meant by his last words:'The Professor--it was she'?"
The Professor shook his head.
"Susan is a country girl," said he, "and you know the incrediblestupidity of that class. I fancy that the poor fellow murmured someincoherent delirious words, and that she twisted them into thismeaningless message."
"I see. You have no explanation yourself of the tragedy?"
"Possibly an accident; possibly--I only breathe it among ourselves--asuicide. Young men have their hidden troubles--some affair of theheart, perhaps, which we have never known. It is a more probablesupposition than murder."
"But the eye-glasses?"
"Ah! I am only a student--a man of dreams. I cannot explain thepractical things of life. But still, we are aware, my friend, thatlove-gages may take strange shapes. By all means take anothercigarette. It is a pleasure to see anyone appreciate them so. A fan,a glove, glasses--who knows what article may be carried as a token ortreasured when a man puts an end to his life? This gentleman speaksof footsteps in the grass; but, after all, it is easy to be mistakenon such a point. As to the knife, it might well be thrown far fromthe unfortunate man as he fell. It is possible that I speak as achild, but to me it seems that Willoughby Smith has met his fate byhis own hand."
Holmes seemed struck by the theory thus put forward, and he continuedto walk up and down for some time, lost in thought and consumingcigarette after cigarette.
"Tell me, Professor Coram," he said, at last, "what is in thatcupboard in the bureau?"
"Nothing that would help a thief. Family papers, letters from my poorwife, diplomas of Universities which have done me honour. Here is thekey. You can look for yourself."
Holmes picked up the key and looked at it for an instant; then hehanded it back.
"No; I hardly think that it would help me," said he. "I should preferto go quietly down to your garden and turn the whole matter over inmy head. There is something to be said for the theory of suicidewhich you have put forward. We must apologize for having intrudedupon you, Professor Coram, and I promise that we won't disturb youuntil after lunch. At two o'clock we will come again and report toyou anything which may have happened in the interval."
Holmes was curiously distrait, and we walked up and down the gardenpath for some time in silence.
"Have you a clue?" I asked, at last.
"It depends upon those cigarettes that I smoked," said he. "It ispossible that I am utterly mistaken. The cigarettes will show me."
"My dear Holmes," I exclaimed, "how on earth--"
"Well, well, you may see for yourself. If not, there's no harm done.Of course, we always have the optician clue to fall back upon, but Itake a short cut when I can get it. Ah, here is the good Mrs. Marker!Let us enjoy five minutes of instructive conversation with her."
I may have remarked before that Holmes had, when he liked, apeculiarly ingratiating way with women, and that he very readilyestablished terms of confidence with them. In half the time which hehad named he had captured the housekeeper's goodwill, and waschatting with her as if he had known her for years.
"Yes, Mr. Holmes, it is as you say, sir. He does smoke somethingterrible. All day and sometimes all night, sir. I've seen that roomof a morning--well, sir, you'd have thought it was a London fog. Pooryoung Mr. Smith, he was a smoker also, but not as bad as theProfessor. His health--well, I don't know that it's better nor worsefor the smoking."
"Ah!" said Holmes, "but it kills the appetite."
"Well, I don't know about that, sir."
"I suppose the Professor eats hardly anything?"
"Well, he is variable. I'll say that for him."
"I'll wager he took no breakfast this morning, and won't face hislunch after all the cigarettes I saw him consume."
"Well, you're out there, sir, as it happens, for he ate a remarkablebig breakfast this morning. I don't know when I've known him make abetter one, and he's ordered a good dish of cutlets for his lunch.I'm surprised myself, for since I came into that room yesterday andsaw young Mr. Smith lying there on the floor I couldn't bear to lookat food. Well, it takes all sorts to make a world, and the Professorhasn't let it take his appetite away."
We loitered the morning away in the garden. Stanley Hopkins had gonedown to the village to look into some rumours of a strange woman whohad been seen by some children on the Chatham Road the previousmorning. As to my friend, all his usual energy seemed to havedeserted him. I had never known him handle a case in such ahalf-hearted fashion. Even the news brought back by Hopkins that hehad found the children and that they had undoubtedly seen a womanexactly corresponding with Holmes's description, and wearing eitherspectacles or eye-glasses, failed to rouse any sign of keen interest.He was more attentive when Susan, who waited upon us at lunch,volunteered the information that she believed Mr. Smith had been outfor a walk yesterday morning, and that he had only returned half anhour before the tragedy occurred. I could not myself see the bearingof this incident, but I clearly perceived that Holmes was weaving itinto the general scheme which he had formed in his brain. Suddenly hesprang from his chair and glanced at his watch. "Two o'clock,gentlemen," said he. "We must go up and have it out with our friendthe Professor."
The old man had just finished his lunch, and certainly his empty dishbore evidence to the good appetite with which his housekeeper hadcredited him. He was, indeed, a weird figure as he turned his whitemane and his glowing eyes towards us. The eternal cigarettesmouldered in his mouth. He had been dressed and was seated in anarm-chair by the fire.
"Well, Mr. Holmes, have you solved this mystery yet?" He shoved thelarge tin of cigarettes which stood on a table beside him towards mycompanion. Holmes stretched out his hand at the same moment, andbetween them they tipped the box over the edge. For a minute or twowe were all on our knees retrieving stray cigarettes from impossibleplaces. When we rose again I observed that Holmes's eyes were shiningand his cheeks tinged with colour. Only at a crisis have I seen thosebattle-signals flying.
"Yes," said he, "I have solved it."
Stanley Hopkins and I stared in amazement. Something like a sneerquivered over the gaunt features of the old Professor.
"Indeed! In the garden?"
"No, here."
"Here! When?"
"This instant."
"You are surely joking, Mr. Sherlock Holmes. You compel me to tellyou that this is too serious a matter to be treated in such afashion."
"I have forged and tested every link of my chain, Professor Coram,and I am sure that it is sound. What your motives are or what exactpart you play in this strange business I am not yet able to say. In afew minutes I shall probably hear it from your own lips. Meanwhile Iwill reconstruct what is past for your benefit, so that you may knowthe information which I still require.
"A lady yesterday entered your study. She came with the intention ofpossessing herself of certain documents which were in your bureau.She had a key of her own. I have had an opportunity of examiningyours, and I do not find that slight discolouration which the scratchmade upon the varnish would have produced. You were not an accessory,therefore, and she came, so far as I can read the evidence, withoutyour knowledge to rob you."
The Professor blew a cloud from his lips. "This is most interestingand instructive," said he. "Have you no more to add? Surely, havingtraced this lady so far, you can also say what has become of her."
"I will endeavour to do so. In the first place she was seized by yoursecretary, and stabbed him in order to escape. This catastrophe I aminclined to regard as an unhappy accident, for I am convinced thatthe lady had no intention of inflicting so grievous an injury. Anassassin does not come unarmed. Horrified by what she had done sherushed wildly away from the scene of the tragedy. Unfortunately forher she had lost her glasses in the scuffle, and as she was extremelyshort-sighted she was really helpless without them. She ran down acorridor, which she imagined to be that by which she had come--bothwere lined with cocoanut matting--and it was only when it was toolate that she understood that she had taken the wrong passage andthat her retreat was cut off behind her. What was she to do? Shecould not go back. She could not remain where she was. She must goon. She went on. She mounted a stair, pushed open a door, and foundherself in your room."
The old man sat with his mouth open staring wildly at Holmes.Amazement and fear were stamped upon his expressive features. Now,with an effort, he shrugged his shoulders and burst into insincerelaughter.
"All very fine, Mr. Holmes," said he. "But there is one little flawin your splendid theory. I was myself in my room, and I never left itduring the day."
"I am aware of that, Professor Coram."
"And you mean to say that I could lie upon that bed and not be awarethat a woman had entered my room?"
"I never said so. You were aware of it. You spoke with her. Yourecognised her. You aided her to escape."
Again the Professor burst into high-keyed laughter. He had risen tohis feet and his eyes glowed like embers.
"You are mad!" he cried. "You are talking insanely. I helped her toescape? Where is she now?"
"She is there," said Holmes, and he pointed to a high bookcase in thecorner of the room.
I saw the old man throw up his arms, a terrible convulsion passedover his grim face, and he fell back in his chair. At the sameinstant the bookcase at which Holmes pointed swung round upon ahinge, and a woman rushed out into the room. "You are right!" shecried, in a strange foreign voice. "You are right! I am here."
She was brown with the dust and draped with the cobwebs which hadcome from the walls of her hiding-place. Her face, too, was streakedwith grime, and at the best she could never have been handsome, forshe had the exact physical characteristics which Holmes had divined,with, in addition, a long and obstinate chin. What with her naturalblindness, and what with the change from dark to light, she stood asone dazed, blinking about her to see where and who we were. And yet,in spite of all these disadvantages, there was a certain nobility inthe woman's bearing, a gallantry in the defiant chin and in theupraised head, which compelled something of respect and admiration.Stanley Hopkins had laid his hand upon her arm and claimed her as hisprisoner, but she waved him aside gently, and yet with anovermastering dignity which compelled obedience. The old man lay backin his chair, with a twitching face, and stared at her with broodingeyes.
"Yes, sir, I am your prisoner," she said. "From where I stood I couldhear everything, and I know that you have learned the truth. Iconfess it all. It was I who killed the young man. But you are right,you who say it was an accident. I did not even know that it was aknife which I held in my hand, for in my despair I snatched anythingfrom the table and struck at him to make him let me go. It is thetruth that I tell."
"Madam," said Holmes, "I am sure that it is the truth. I fear thatyou are far from well."
She had turned a dreadful colour, the more ghastly under the darkdust-streaks upon her face. She seated herself on the side of thebed; then she resumed.
"I have only a little time here," she said, "but I would have you toknow the whole truth. I am this man's wife. He is not an Englishman.He is a Russian. His name I will not tell."
For the first time the old man stirred. "God bless you, Anna!" hecried. "God bless you!"
She cast a look of the deepest disdain in his direction. "Why shouldyou cling so hard to that wretched life of yours, Sergius?" said she."It has done harm to many and good to none--not even to yourself.However, it is not for me to cause the frail thread to be snappedbefore God's time. I have enough already upon my soul since I crossedthe threshold of this cursed house. But I must speak or I shall betoo late.
"I have said, gentlemen, that I am this man's wife. He was fifty andI a foolish girl of twenty when we married. It was in a city ofRussia, a University--I will not name the place."
"God bless you, Anna!" murmured the old man again.
"We were reformers--revolutionists--Nihilists, you understand. He andI and many more. Then there came a time of trouble, a police officerwas killed, many were arrested, evidence was wanted, and in order tosave his own life and to earn a great reward my husband betrayed hisown wife and his companions. Yes, we were all arrested upon hisconfession. Some of us found our way to the gallows and some toSiberia. I was among these last, but my term was not for life. Myhusband came to England with his ill-gotten gains, and has lived inquiet ever since, knowing well that if the Brotherhood knew where hewas not a week would pass before justice would be done."
The old man reached out a trembling hand and helped himself to acigarette. "I am in your hands, Anna," said he. "You were always goodto me."
"I have not yet told you the height of his villainy," said she."Among our comrades of the Order there was one who was the friend ofmy heart. He was noble, unselfish, loving--all that my husband wasnot. He hated violence. We were all guilty--if that is guilt--but hewas not. He wrote for ever dissuading us from such a course. Theseletters would have saved him. So would my diary, in which from day today I had entered both my feelings towards him and the view whicheach of us had taken. My husband found and kept both diary andletters. He hid them, and he tried hard to swear away the young man'slife. In this he failed, but Alexis was sent a convict to Siberia,where now, at this moment, he works in a salt mine. Think of that,you villain, you villain; now, now, at this very moment, Alexis, aman whose name you are not worthy to speak, works and lives like aslave, and yet I have your life in my hands and I let you go."
"You were always a noble woman, Anna," said the old man, puffing athis cigarette.
She had risen, but she fell back again with a little cry of pain.
"I must finish," she said. "When my term was over I set myself to getthe diary and letters which, if sent to the Russian Government, wouldprocure my friend's release. I knew that my husband had come toEngland. After months of searching I discovered where he was. I knewthat he still had the diary, for when I was in Siberia I had a letterfrom him once reproaching me and quoting some passages from itspages. Yet I was sure that with his revengeful nature he would nevergive it to me of his own free will. I must get it for myself. Withthis object I engaged an agent from a private detective firm, whoentered my husband's house as secretary--it was your secondsecretary, Sergius, the one who left you so hurriedly. He found thatpapers were kept in the cupboard, and he got an impression of thekey. He would not go farther. He furnished me with a plan of thehouse, and he told me that in the forenoon the study was alwaysempty, as the secretary was employed up here. So at last I took mycourage in both hands and I came down to get the papers for myself. Isucceeded, but at what a cost!
"I had just taken the papers and was locking the cupboard when theyoung man seized me. I had seen him already that morning. He had metme in the road and I had asked him to tell me where Professor Coramlived, not knowing that he was in his employ."
"Exactly! exactly!" said Holmes. "The secretary came back and toldhis employer of the woman he had met. Then in his last breath hetried to send a message that it was she--the she whom he had justdiscussed with him."
"You must let me speak," said the woman, in an imperative voice, andher face contracted as if in pain. "When he had fallen I rushed fromthe room, chose the wrong door, and found myself in my husband'sroom. He spoke of giving me up. I showed him that if he did so hislife was in my hands. If he gave me to the law I could give him tothe Brotherhood. It was not that I wished to live for my own sake,but it was that I desired to accomplish my purpose. He knew that Iwould do what I said--that his own fate was involved in mine. Forthat reason and for no other he shielded me. He thrust me into thatdark hiding-place, a relic of old days, known only to himself. Hetook his meals in his own room, and so was able to give me part ofhis food. It was agreed that when the police left the house I shouldslip away by night and come back no more. But in some way you haveread our plans." She tore from the bosom of her dress a small packet."These are my last words," said she; "here is the packet which willsave Alexis. I confide it to your honour and to your love of justice.Take it! You will deliver it at the Russian Embassy. Now I have donemy duty, and--"
"Stop her!" cried Holmes. He had bounded across the room and hadwrenched a small phial from her hand.
"Too late!" she said, sinking back on the bed. "Too late! I took thepoison before I left my hiding-place. My head swims! I am going! Icharge you, sir, to remember the packet."
"A simple case, and yet in some ways an instructive one," Holmesremarked, as we travelled back to town. "It hinged from the outsetupon the pince-nez. But for the fortunate chance of the dying manhaving seized these I am not sure that we could ever have reached oursolution. It was clear to me from the strength of the glasses thatthe wearer must have been very blind and helpless when deprived ofthem. When you asked me to believe that she walked along a narrowstrip of grass without once making a false step I remarked, as youmay remember, that it was a noteworthy performance. In my mind I setit down as an impossible performance, save in the unlikely case thatshe had a second pair of glasses. I was forced, therefore, toseriously consider the hypothesis that she had remained within thehouse. On perceiving the similarity of the two corridors it becameclear that she might very easily have made such a mistake, and inthat case it was evident that she must have entered the Professor'sroom. I was keenly on the alert, therefore, for whatever would bearout this supposition, and I examined the room narrowly for anythingin the shape of a hiding-place. The carpet seemed continuous andfirmly nailed, so I dismissed the idea of a trap-door. There mightwell be a recess behind the books. As you are aware, such devices arecommon in old libraries. I observed that books were piled on thefloor at all other points, but that one bookcase was left clear.This, then, might be the door. I could see no marks to guide me, butthe carpet was of a dun colour, which lends itself very well toexamination. I therefore smoked a great number of those excellentcigarettes, and I dropped the ash all over the space in front of thesuspected bookcase. It was a simple trick, but exceedingly effective.I then went downstairs and I ascertained, in your presence, Watson,without your perceiving the drift of my remarks, that ProfessorCoram's consumption of food had increased--as one would expect whenhe is supplying a second person. We then ascended to the room again,when, by upsetting the cigarette-box, I obtained a very excellentview of the floor, and was able to see quite clearly, from the tracesupon the cigarette ash, that the prisoner had, in our absence, comeout from her retreat. Well, Hopkins, here we are at Charing Cross,and I congratulate you on having brought your case to a successfulconclusion. You are going to head-quarters, no doubt. I think,Watson, you and I will drive together to the Russian Embassy."





              THE ADVENTURE OF THE MISSING THREE-QUARTER
We were fairly accustomed to receive weird telegrams at Baker Street,but I have a particular recollection of one which reached us on agloomy February morning some seven or eight years ago and gave Mr.Sherlock Holmes a puzzled quarter of an hour. It was addressed tohim, and ran thus:
"Please await me. Terrible misfortune. Right wing three-quartermissing; indispensable to-morrow.Overton."
"Strand post-mark and dispatched ten-thirty-six," said Holmes,reading it over and over. "Mr. Overton was evidently considerablyexcited when he sent it, and somewhat incoherent in consequence.Well, well, he will be here, I dare say, by the time I have lookedthrough the times, and then we shall know all about it. Even the mostinsignificant problem would be welcome in these stagnant days."
Things had indeed been very slow with us, and I had learned to dreadsuch periods of inaction, for I knew by experience that mycompanion's brain was so abnormally active that it was dangerous toleave it without material upon which to work. For years I hadgradually weaned him from that drug mania which had threatened onceto check his remarkable career. Now I knew that under ordinaryconditions he no longer craved for this artificial stimulus, but Iwas well aware that the fiend was not dead, but sleeping; and I haveknown that the sleep was a light one and the waking near when inperiods of idleness I have seen the drawn look upon Holmes's asceticface, and the brooding of his deep-set and inscrutable eyes.Therefore I blessed this Mr. Overton, whoever he might be, since hehad come with his enigmatic message to break that dangerous calmwhich brought more peril to my friend than all the storms of histempestuous life.
As we had expected, the telegram was soon followed by its sender, andthe card of Mr. Cyril Overton, of Trinity College, Cambridge,announced the arrival of an enormous young man, sixteen stone ofsolid bone and muscle, who spanned the doorway with his broadshoulders and looked from one of us to the other with a comely facewhich was haggard with anxiety.
"Mr. Sherlock Holmes?"
My companion bowed.
"I've been down to Scotland Yard, Mr. Holmes. I saw Inspector StanleyHopkins. He advised me to come to you. He said the case, so far as hecould see, was more in your line than in that of the regular police."
"Pray sit down and tell me what is the matter."
"It's awful, Mr. Holmes, simply awful! I wonder my hair isn't grey.Godfrey Staunton--you've heard of him, of course? He's simply thehinge that the whole team turns on. I'd rather spare two from thepack and have Godfrey for my three-quarter line. Whether it'spassing, or tackling, or dribbling, there's no one to touch him; andthen, he's got the head and can hold us all together. What am I todo? That's what I ask you, Mr. Holmes. There's Moorhouse, firstreserve, but he is trained as a half, and he always edges right in onto the scrum instead of keeping out on the touch-line. He's a fineplace-kick, it's true, but, then, he has no judgment, and he can'tsprint for nuts. Why, Morton or Johnson, the Oxford fliers, couldromp round him. Stevenson is fast enough, but he couldn't drop fromthe twenty-five line, and a three-quarter who can't either punt ordrop isn't worth a place for pace alone. No, Mr. Holmes, we are doneunless you can help me to find Godfrey Staunton."
My friend had listened with amused surprise to this long speech,which was poured forth with extraordinary vigour and earnestness,every point being driven home by the slapping of a brawny hand uponthe speaker's knee. When our visitor was silent Holmes stretched outhis hand and took down letter "S" of his commonplace book. For oncehe dug in vain into that mine of varied information.
"There is Arthur H. Staunton, the rising young forger," said he, "andthere was Henry Staunton, whom I helped to hang, but Godfrey Stauntonis a new name to me."
It was our visitor's turn to look surprised.
"Why, Mr. Holmes, I thought you knew things," said he. "I suppose,then, if you have never heard of Godfrey Staunton you don't knowCyril Overton either?"
Holmes shook his head good-humouredly.
"Great Scot!" cried the athlete. "Why, I was first reserve forEngland against Wales, and I've skippered the 'Varsity all this year.But that's nothing! I didn't think there was a soul in England whodidn't know Godfrey Staunton, the crack three-quarter, Cambridge,Blackheath, and five Internationals. Good Lord! Mr. Holmes, wherehave you lived?"
Holmes laughed at the young giant's naive astonishment.
"You live in a different world to me, Mr. Overton, a sweeter andhealthier one. My ramifications stretch out into many sections ofsociety, but never, I am happy to say, into amateur sport, which isthe best and soundest thing in England. However, your unexpectedvisit this morning shows me that even in that world of fresh air andfair play there may be work for me to do; so now, my good sir, I begyou to sit down and to tell me slowly and quietly exactly what it isthat has occurred, and how you desire that I should help you."
Young Overton's face assumed the bothered look of the man who is moreaccustomed to using his muscles than his wits; but by degrees, withmany repetitions and obscurities which I may omit from his narrative,he laid his strange story before us.
"It's this way, Mr. Holmes. As I have said, I am the skipper of theRugger team of Cambridge 'Varsity, and Godfrey Staunton is my bestman. To-morrow we play Oxford. Yesterday we all came up and wesettled at Bentley's private hotel. At ten o'clock I went round andsaw that all the fellows had gone to roost, for I believe in stricttraining and plenty of sleep to keep a team fit. I had a word or twowith Godfrey before he turned in. He seemed to me to be pale andbothered. I asked him what was the matter. He said he was allright--just a touch of headache. I bade him good-night and left him.Half an hour later the porter tells me that a rough-looking man witha beard called with a note for Godfrey. He had not gone to bed andthe note was taken to his room. Godfrey read it and fell back in achair as if he had been pole-axed. The porter was so scared that hewas going to fetch me, but Godfrey stopped him, had a drink of water,and pulled himself together. Then he went downstairs, said a fewwords to the man who was waiting in the hall, and the two of themwent off together. The last that the porter saw of them, they werealmost running down the street in the direction of the Strand. Thismorning Godfrey's room was empty, his bed had never been slept in,and his things were all just as I had seen them the night before. Hehad gone off at a moment's notice with this stranger, and no word hascome from him since. I don't believe he will ever come back. He was asportsman, was Godfrey, down to his marrow, and he wouldn't havestopped his training and let in his skipper if it were not for somecause that was too strong for him. No; I feel as if he were gone forgood and we should never see him again."
Sherlock Holmes listened with the deepest attention to this singularnarrative.
"What did you do?" he asked.
"I wired to Cambridge to learn if anything had been heard of himthere. I have had an answer. No one has seen him."
"Could he have got back to Cambridge?"
"Yes, there is a late train--quarter-past eleven."
"But so far as you can ascertain he did not take it?"
"No, he has not been seen."
"What did you do next?"
"I wired to Lord Mount-James."
"Why to Lord Mount-James?"
"Godfrey is an orphan, and Lord Mount-James is his nearestrelative--his uncle, I believe."
"Indeed. This throws new light upon the matter. Lord Mount-James isone of the richest men in England."
"So I've heard Godfrey say."
"And your friend was closely related?"
"Yes, he was his heir, and the old boy is nearly eighty--cram full ofgout, too. They say he could chalk his billiard-cue with hisknuckles. He never allowed Godfrey a shilling in his life, for he isan absolute miser, but it will all come to him right enough."
"Have you heard from Lord Mount-James?"
"No."
"What motive could your friend have in going to Lord Mount-James?"
"Well, something was worrying him the night before, and if it was todo with money it is possible that he would make for his nearestrelative who had so much of it, though from all I have heard he wouldnot have much chance of getting it. Godfrey was not fond of the oldman. He would not go if he could help it."
"Well, we can soon determine that. If your friend was going to hisrelative, Lord Mount-James, you have then to explain the visit ofthis rough-looking fellow at so late an hour, and the agitation thatwas caused by his coming."
Cyril Overton pressed his hands to his head. "I can make nothing ofit," said he.
"Well, well, I have a clear day, and I shall be happy to look intothe matter," said Holmes. "I should strongly recommend you to makeyour preparations for your match without reference to this younggentleman. It must, as you say, have been an overpowering necessitywhich tore him away in such a fashion, and the same necessity islikely to hold him away. Let us step round together to this hotel,and see if the porter can throw any fresh light upon the matter."
Sherlock Holmes was a past-master in the art of putting a humblewitness at his ease, and very soon, in the privacy of GodfreyStaunton's abandoned room, he had extracted all that the porter hadto tell. The visitor of the night before was not a gentleman, neitherwas he a working man. He was simply what the porter described as a"medium-looking chap"; a man of fifty, beard grizzled, pale face,quietly dressed. He seemed himself to be agitated. The porter hadobserved his hand trembling when he had held out the note. GodfreyStaunton had crammed the note into his pocket. Staunton had notshaken hands with the man in the hall. They had exchanged a fewsentences, of which the porter had only distinguished the one word"time." Then they had hurried off in the manner described. It wasjust half-past ten by the hall clock.
"Let me see," said Holmes, seating himself on Staunton's bed. "Youare the day porter, are you not?"
"Yes, sir; I go off duty at eleven."
"The night porter saw nothing, I suppose?"
"No, sir; one theatre party came in late. No one else."
"Were you on duty all day yesterday?"
"Yes, sir."
"Did you take any messages to Mr. Staunton?"
"Yes, sir; one telegram."
"Ah! that's interesting. What o'clock was this?"
"About six."
"Where was Mr. Staunton when he received it?"
"Here in his room."
"Were you present when he opened it?"
"Yes, sir; I waited to see if there was an answer."
"Well, was there?"
"Yes, sir. He wrote an answer."
"Did you take it?"
"No; he took it himself."
"But he wrote it in your presence?"
"Yes, sir. I was standing by the door, and he with his back turned atthat table. When he had written it he said, 'All right, porter, Iwill take this myself.'"
"What did he write it with?"
"A pen, sir."
"Was the telegraphic form one of these on the table?"
"Yes, sir; it was the top one."
Holmes rose. Taking the forms he carried them over to the window andcarefully examined that which was uppermost.
"It is a pity he did not write in pencil," said he, throwing themdown again with a shrug of disappointment. "As you have no doubtfrequently observed, Watson, the impression usually goes through--afact which has dissolved many a happy marriage. However, I can findno trace here. I rejoice, however, to perceive that he wrote with abroad-pointed quill pen, and I can hardly doubt that we will findsome impression upon this blotting-pad. Ah, yes, surely this is thevery thing!"
He tore off a strip of the blotting-paper and turned towards us thefollowing hieroglyphic:
[ Picture: Several unreadable scrawls on paper ]
Cyril Overton was much excited. "Hold it to the glass!" he cried.
"That is unnecessary," said Holmes. "The paper is thin, and thereverse will give the message. Here it is." He turned it over and weread:
[ Picture: Stand by us for Gods sake! ]
"So that is the tail end of the telegram which Godfrey Stauntondispatched within a few hours of his disappearance. There are atleast six words of the message which have escaped us; but whatremains--'Stand by us for God's sake!'--proves that this young mansaw a formidable danger which approached him, and from which someoneelse could protect him. 'Us,' mark you! Another person was involved.Who should it be but the pale-faced, bearded man, who seemed himselfin so nervous a state? What, then, is the connection between GodfreyStaunton and the bearded man? And what is the third source from whicheach of them sought for help against pressing danger? Our inquiry hasalready narrowed down to that."
"We have only to find to whom that telegram is addressed," Isuggested.
"Exactly, my dear Watson. Your reflection, though profound, hadalready crossed my mind. But I dare say it may have come to yournotice that if you walk into a post-office and demand to see thecounterfoil of another man's message there may be some disinclinationon the part of the officials to oblige you. There is so much red tapein these matters! However, I have no doubt that with a littledelicacy and finesse the end may be attained. Meanwhile, I shouldlike in your presence, Mr. Overton, to go through these papers whichhave been left upon the table."
There were a number of letters, bills, and note-books, which Holmesturned over and examined with quick, nervous fingers and darting,penetrating eyes. "Nothing here," he said, at last. "By the way, Isuppose your friend was a healthy young fellow--nothing amiss withhim?"
"Sound as a bell."
"Have you ever known him ill?"
"Not a day. He has been laid up with a hack, and once he slipped hisknee-cap, but that was nothing."
"Perhaps he was not so strong as you suppose. I should think he mayhave had some secret trouble. With your assent I will put one or twoof these papers in my pocket, in case they should bear upon ourfuture inquiry."
"One moment! one moment!" cried a querulous voice, and we looked upto find a queer little old man, jerking and twitching in the doorway.He was dressed in rusty black, with a very broad brimmed top-hat anda loose white necktie--the whole effect being that of a very rusticparson or of an undertaker's mute. Yet, in spite of his shabby andeven absurd appearance, his voice had a sharp crackle, and his mannera quick intensity which commanded attention.
"Who are you, sir, and by what right do you touch this gentleman'spapers?" he asked.
"I am a private detective, and I am endeavouring to explain hisdisappearance."
"Oh, you are, are you? And who instructed you, eh?"
"This gentleman, Mr. Staunton's friend, was referred to me byScotland Yard."
"Who are you, sir?"
"I am Cyril Overton."
"Then it is you who sent me a telegram. My name is Lord Mount-James.I came round as quickly as the Bayswater 'bus would bring me. So youhave instructed a detective?"
"Yes, sir."
"And are you prepared to meet the cost?"
"I have no doubt, sir, that my friend Godfrey, when we find him, willbe prepared to do that."
"But if he is never found, eh? Answer me that!"
"In that case no doubt his family--"
"Nothing of the sort, sir!" screamed the little man. "Don't look tome for a penny--not a penny! You understand that, Mr. Detective! I amall the family that this young man has got, and I tell you that I amnot responsible. If he has any expectations it is due to the factthat I have never wasted money, and I do not propose to begin to doso now. As to those papers with which you are making so free, I maytell you that in case there should be anything of any value amongthem you will be held strictly to account for what you do with them."
"Very good, sir," said Sherlock Holmes. "May I ask in the meanwhilewhether you have yourself any theory to account for this young man'sdisappearance?"
"No, sir, I have not. He is big enough and old enough to look afterhimself, and if he is so foolish as to lose himself I entirely refuseto accept the responsibility of hunting for him."
"I quite understand your position," said Holmes, with a mischievoustwinkle in his eyes. "Perhaps you don't quite understand mine.Godfrey Staunton appears to have been a poor man. If he has beenkidnapped it could not have been for anything which he himselfpossesses. The fame of your wealth has gone abroad, Lord Mount-James,and it is entirely possible that a gang of thieves have secured yournephew in order to gain from him some information as to your house,your habits, and your treasure."
The face of our unpleasant little visitor turned as white as hisneckcloth.
"Heavens, sir, what an idea! I never thought of such villainy! Whatinhuman rogues there are in the world! But Godfrey is a fine lad--astaunch lad. Nothing would induce him to give his old uncle away.I'll have the plate moved over to the bank this evening. In themeantime spare no pains, Mr. Detective! I beg you to leave no stoneunturned to bring him safely back. As to money, well, so far as afiver, or even a tenner, goes, you can always look to me."
Even in his chastened frame of mind the noble miser could give us noinformation which could help us, for he knew little of the privatelife of his nephew. Our only clue lay in the truncated telegram, andwith a copy of this in his hand Holmes set forth to find a secondlink for his chain. We had shaken off Lord Mount-James, and Overtonhad gone to consult with the other members of his team over themisfortune which had befallen them.
There was a telegraph-office at a short distance from the hotel. Wehalted outside it.
"It's worth trying, Watson," said Holmes. "Of course, with a warrantwe could demand to see the counterfoils, but we have not reached thatstage yet. I don't suppose they remember faces in so busy a place.Let us venture it."
"I am sorry to trouble you," said he, in his blandest manner, to theyoung woman behind the grating; "there is some small mistake about atelegram I sent yesterday. I have had no answer, and I very much fearthat I must have omitted to put my name at the end. Could you tell meif this was so?"
The young woman turned over a sheaf of counterfoils.
"What o'clock was it?" she asked.
"A little after six."
"Whom was it to?"
Holmes put his finger to his lips and glanced at me. "The last wordsin it were 'for God's sake,'" he whispered, confidentially; "I amvery anxious at getting no answer."
The young woman separated one of the forms.
"This is it. There is no name," said she, smoothing it out upon thecounter.
"Then that, of course, accounts for my getting no answer," saidHolmes. "Dear me, how very stupid of me, to be sure! Good morning,miss, and many thanks for having relieved my mind." He chuckled andrubbed his hands when we found ourselves in the street once more.
"Well?" I asked.
"We progress, my dear Watson, we progress. I had seven differentschemes for getting a glimpse of that telegram, but I could hardlyhope to succeed the very first time."
"And what have you gained?"
"A starting-point for our investigation." He hailed a cab. "King'sCross Station," said he.
"We have a journey, then?"
"Yes; I think we must run down to Cambridge together. All theindications seem to me to point in that direction."
"Tell me," I asked, as we rattled up Gray's Inn Road, "have you anysuspicion yet as to the cause of the disappearance? I don't thinkthat among all our cases I have known one where the motives are moreobscure. Surely you don't really imagine that he may be kidnapped inorder to give information against his wealthy uncle?"
"I confess, my dear Watson, that that does not appeal to me as a veryprobable explanation. It struck me, however, as being the one whichwas most likely to interest that exceedingly unpleasant old person."
"It certainly did that. But what are your alternatives?"
"I could mention several. You must admit that it is curious andsuggestive that this incident should occur on the eve of thisimportant match, and should involve the only man whose presence seemsessential to the success of the side. It may, of course, becoincidence, but it is interesting. Amateur sport is free frombetting, but a good deal of outside betting goes on among the public,and it is possible that it might be worth someone's while to get at aplayer as the ruffians of the turf get at a race-horse. There is oneexplanation. A second very obvious one is that this young man reallyis the heir of a great property, however modest his means may atpresent be, and it is not impossible that a plot to hold him forransom might be concocted."
"These theories take no account of the telegram."
"Quite true, Watson. The telegram still remains the only solid thingwith which we have to deal, and we must not permit our attention towander away from it. It is to gain light upon the purpose of thistelegram that we are now upon our way to Cambridge. The path of ourinvestigation is at present obscure, but I shall be very muchsurprised if before evening we have not cleared it up or made aconsiderable advance along it."
It was already dark when we reached the old University city. Holmestook a cab at the station, and ordered the man to drive to the houseof Dr. Leslie Armstrong. A few minutes later we had stopped at alarge mansion in the busiest thoroughfare. We were shown in, andafter a long wait were at last admitted into the consulting-room,where we found the doctor seated behind his table.
It argues the degree in which I had lost touch with my professionthat the name of Leslie Armstrong was unknown to me. Now I am awarethat he is not only one of the heads of the medical school of theUniversity, but a thinker of European reputation in more than onebranch of science. Yet even without knowing his brilliant record onecould not fail to be impressed by a mere glance at the man, thesquare, massive face, the brooding eyes under the thatched brows, andthe granite moulding of the inflexible jaw. A man of deep character,a man with an alert mind, grim, ascetic, self-contained,formidable--so I read Dr. Leslie Armstrong. He held my friend's cardin his hand, and he looked up with no very pleased expression uponhis dour features.
"I have heard your name, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and I am aware of yourprofession, one of which I by no means approve."
"In that, doctor, you will find yourself in agreement with everycriminal in the country," said my friend, quietly.
"So far as your efforts are directed towards the suppression ofcrime, sir, they must have the support of every reasonable member ofthe community, though I cannot doubt that the official machinery isamply sufficient for the purpose. Where your calling is more open tocriticism is when you pry into the secrets of private individuals,when you rake up family matters which are better hidden, and when youincidentally waste the time of men who are more busy than yourself.At the present moment, for example, I should be writing a treatiseinstead of conversing with you."
"No doubt, doctor; and yet the conversation may prove more importantthan the treatise. Incidentally I may tell you that we are doing thereverse of what you very justly blame, and that we are endeavouringto prevent anything like public exposure of private matters whichmust necessarily follow when once the case is fairly in the hands ofthe official police. You may look upon me simply as an irregularpioneer who goes in front of the regular forces of the country. Ihave come to ask you about Mr. Godfrey Staunton."
"What about him?"
"You know him, do you not?"
"He is an intimate friend of mine."
"You are aware that he has disappeared?"
"Ah, indeed!" There was no change of expression in the ruggedfeatures of the doctor.
"He left his hotel last night. He has not been heard of."
"No doubt he will return."
"To-morrow is the 'Varsity football match."
"I have no sympathy with these childish games. The young man's fateinterests me deeply, since I know him and like him. The footballmatch does not come within my horizon at all."
"I claim your sympathy, then, in my investigation of Mr. Staunton'sfate. Do you know where he is?"
"Certainly not."
"You have not seen him since yesterday?"
"No, I have not."
"Was Mr. Staunton a healthy man?"
"Absolutely."
"Did you ever know him ill?"
"Never."
Holmes popped a sheet of paper before the doctor's eyes. "Thenperhaps you will explain this receipted bill for thirteen guineas,paid by Mr. Godfrey Staunton last month to Dr. Leslie Armstrong ofCambridge. I picked it out from among the papers upon his desk."
The doctor flushed with anger.
"I do not feel that there is any reason why I should render anexplanation to you, Mr. Holmes."
Holmes replaced the bill in his note-book. "If you prefer a publicexplanation it must come sooner or later," said he. "I have alreadytold you that I can hush up that which others will be bound topublish, and you would really be wiser to take me into your completeconfidence."
"I know nothing about it."
"Did you hear from Mr. Staunton in London?"
"Certainly not."
"Dear me, dear me; the post-office again!" Holmes sighed, wearily. "Amost urgent telegram was dispatched to you from London by GodfreyStaunton at six-fifteen yesterday evening--a telegram which isundoubtedly associated with his disappearance--and yet you have nothad it. It is most culpable. I shall certainly go down to the officehere and register a complaint."
Dr. Leslie Armstrong sprang up from behind his desk, and his darkface was crimson with fury.
"I'll trouble you to walk out of my house, sir," said he. "You cantell your employer, Lord Mount-James, that I do not wish to haveanything to do either with him or with his agents. No, sir, notanother word!" He rang the bell furiously. "John, show thesegentlemen out!" A pompous butler ushered us severely to the door, andwe found ourselves in the street. Holmes burst out laughing.
"Dr. Leslie Armstrong is certainly a man of energy and character,"said he. "I have not seen a man who, if he turned his talents thatway, was more calculated to fill the gap left by the illustriousMoriarty. And now, my poor Watson, here we are, stranded andfriendless in this inhospitable town, which we cannot leave withoutabandoning our case. This little inn just opposite Armstrong's houseis singularly adapted to our needs. If you would engage a front roomand purchase the necessaries for the night, I may have time to make afew inquiries."
These few inquiries proved, however, to be a more lengthy proceedingthan Holmes had imagined, for he did not return to the inn untilnearly nine o'clock. He was pale and dejected, stained with dust, andexhausted with hunger and fatigue. A cold supper was ready upon thetable, and when his needs were satisfied and his pipe alight he wasready to take that half comic and wholly philosophic view which wasnatural to him when his affairs were going awry. The sound ofcarriage wheels caused him to rise and glance out of the window. Abrougham and pair of greys under the glare of a gas-lamp stood beforethe doctor's door.
"It's been out three hours," said Holmes; "started at half-past six,and here it is back again. That gives a radius of ten or twelvemiles, and he does it once, or sometimes twice, a day."
"No unusual thing for a doctor in practice."
"But Armstrong is not really a doctor in practice. He is a lecturerand a consultant, but he does not care for general practice, whichdistracts him from his literary work. Why, then, does he make theselong journeys, which must be exceedingly irksome to him, and who isit that he visits?"
"His coachman--"
"My dear Watson, can you doubt that it was to him that I firstapplied? I do not know whether it came from his own innate depravityor from the promptings of his master, but he was rude enough to set adog at me. Neither dog nor man liked the look of my stick, however,and the matter fell through. Relations were strained after that, andfurther inquiries out of the question. All that I have learned I gotfrom a friendly native in the yard of our own inn. It was he who toldme of the doctor's habits and of his daily journey. At that instant,to give point to his words, the carriage came round to the door."
"Could you not follow it?"
"Excellent, Watson! You are scintillating this evening. The idea didcross my mind. There is, as you may have observed, a bicycle shopnext to our inn. Into this I rushed, engaged a bicycle, and was ableto get started before the carriage was quite out of sight. I rapidlyovertook it, and then, keeping at a discreet distance of a hundredyards or so, I followed its lights until we were clear of the town.We had got well out on the country road when a somewhat mortifyingincident occurred. The carriage stopped, the doctor alighted, walkedswiftly back to where I had also halted, and told me in an excellentsardonic fashion that he feared the road was narrow, and that hehoped his carriage did not impede the passage of my bicycle. Nothingcould have been more admirable than his way of putting it. I at oncerode past the carriage, and, keeping to the main road, I went on fora few miles, and then halted in a convenient place to see if thecarriage passed. There was no sign of it, however, and so it becameevident that it had turned down one of several side roads which I hadobserved. I rode back, but again saw nothing of the carriage, andnow, as you perceive, it has returned after me. Of course, I had atthe outset no particular reason to connect these journeys with thedisappearance of Godfrey Staunton, and was only inclined toinvestigate them on the general grounds that everything whichconcerns Dr. Armstrong is at present of interest to us; but, now thatI find he keeps so keen a look-out upon anyone who may follow him onthese excursions, the affair appears more important, and I shall notbe satisfied until I have made the matter clear."
"We can follow him to-morrow."
"Can we? It is not so easy as you seem to think. You are not familiarwith Cambridgeshire scenery, are you? It does not lend itself toconcealment. All this country that I passed over to-night is as flatand clean as the palm of your hand, and the man we are following isno fool, as he very clearly showed to-night. I have wired to Overtonto let us know any fresh London developments at this address, and inthe meantime we can only concentrate our attention upon Dr.Armstrong, whose name the obliging young lady at the office allowedme to read upon the counterfoil of Staunton's urgent message. Heknows where the young man is--to that I'll swear--and if he knows,then it must be our own fault if we cannot manage to know also. Atpresent it must be admitted that the odd trick is in his possession,and, as you are aware, Watson, it is not my habit to leave the gamein that condition."
And yet the next day brought us no nearer to the solution of themystery. A note was handed in after breakfast, which Holmes passedacross to me with a smile.
Sir [it ran]:I can assure you that you are wasting your time in dogging mymovements. I have, as you discovered last night, a window at the backof my brougham, and if you desire a twenty-mile ride which will leadyou to the spot from which you started, you have only to follow me.Meanwhile, I can inform you that no spying upon me can in any wayhelp Mr. Godfrey Staunton, and I am convinced that the best serviceyou can do to that gentleman is to return at once to London and toreport to your employer that you are unable to trace him. Your timein Cambridge will certainly be wasted.Yours faithfully,Leslie Armstrong.
"An outspoken, honest antagonist is the doctor," said Holmes. "Well,well, he excites my curiosity, and I must really know more before Ileave him."
"His carriage is at his door now," said I. "There he is stepping intoit. I saw him glance up at our window as he did so. Suppose I try myluck upon the bicycle?"
"No, no, my dear Watson! With all respect for your natural acumen Ido not think that you are quite a match for the worthy doctor. Ithink that possibly I can attain our end by some independentexplorations of my own. I am afraid that I must leave you to your owndevices, as the appearance of two inquiring strangers upon a sleepycountryside might excite more gossip than I care for. No doubt youwill find some sights to amuse you in this venerable city, and I hopeto bring back a more favourable report to you before evening."
Once more, however, my friend was destined to be disappointed. Hecame back at night weary and unsuccessful.
"I have had a blank day, Watson. Having got the doctor's generaldirection, I spent the day in visiting all the villages upon thatside of Cambridge, and comparing notes with publicans and other localnews agencies. I have covered some ground: Chesterton, Histon,Waterbeach, and Oakington have each been explored and have eachproved disappointing. The daily appearance of a brougham and paircould hardly have been overlooked in such Sleepy Hollows. The doctorhas scored once more. Is there a telegram for me?"
"Yes; I opened it. Here it is:
"'Ask for Pompey from Jeremy Dixon, Trinity College.'"I don't understand it."
"Oh, it is clear enough. It is from our friend Overton, and is inanswer to a question from me. I'll just send round a note to Mr.Jeremy Dixon, and then I have no doubt that our luck will turn. Bythe way, is there any news of the match?"
"Yes, the local evening paper has an excellent account in its lastedition. Oxford won by a goal and two tries. The last sentences ofthe description say:
"'The defeat of the Light Blues may be entirely attributed to theunfortunate absence of the crack International, Godfrey Staunton,whose want was felt at every instant of the game. The lack ofcombination in the three-quarter line and their weakness both inattack and defence more than neutralized the efforts of a heavy andhard-working pack.'"
"Then our friend Overton's forebodings have been justified," saidHolmes. "Personally I am in agreement with Dr. Armstrong, andfootball does not come within my horizon. Early to bed to-night,Watson, for I foresee that to-morrow may be an eventful day."
I was horrified by my first glimpse of Holmes next morning, for hesat by the fire holding his tiny hypodermic syringe. I associatedthat instrument with the single weakness of his nature, and I fearedthe worst when I saw it glittering in his hand. He laughed at myexpression of dismay, and laid it upon the table.
"No, no, my dear fellow, there is no cause for alarm. It is not uponthis occasion the instrument of evil, but it will rather prove to bethe key which will unlock our mystery. On this syringe I base all myhopes. I have just returned from a small scouting expedition andeverything is favourable. Eat a good breakfast, Watson, for I proposeto get upon Dr. Armstrong's trail to-day, and once on it I will notstop for rest or food until I run him to his burrow."
"In that case," said I, "we had best carry our breakfast with us, forhe is making an early start. His carriage is at the door."
"Never mind. Let him go. He will be clever if he can drive where Icannot follow him. When you have finished come downstairs with me,and I will introduce you to a detective who is a very eminentspecialist in the work that lies before us."
When we descended I followed Holmes into the stable yard, where heopened the door of a loose-box and led out a squat, lop-eared,white-and-tan dog, something between a beagle and a foxhound.
"Let me introduce you to Pompey," said he. "Pompey is the pride ofthe local draghounds, no very great flier, as his build will show,but a staunch hound on a scent. Well, Pompey, you may not be fast,but I expect you will be too fast for a couple of middle-aged Londongentlemen, so I will take the liberty of fastening this leather leashto your collar. Now, boy, come along, and show what you can do." Heled him across to the doctor's door. The dog sniffed round for aninstant, and then with a shrill whine of excitement started off downthe street, tugging at his leash in his efforts to go faster. In halfan hour, we were clear of the town and hastening down a country road.
"What have you done, Holmes?" I asked.
"A threadbare and venerable device, but useful upon occasion. Iwalked into the doctor's yard this morning and shot my syringe fullof aniseed over the hind wheel. A draghound will follow aniseed fromhere to John o' Groat's, and our friend Armstrong would have to drivethrough the Cam before he would shake Pompey off his trail. Oh, thecunning rascal! This is how he gave me the slip the other night."
The dog had suddenly turned out of the main road into a grass-grownlane. Half a mile farther this opened into another broad road, andthe trail turned hard to the right in the direction of the town,which we had just quitted. The road took a sweep to the south of thetown and continued in the opposite direction to that in which westarted.
"This dtour has been entirely for our benefit, then?" said Holmes."No wonder that my inquiries among those villages led to nothing. Thedoctor has certainly played the game for all it is worth, and onewould like to know the reason for such elaborate deception. Thisshould be the village of Trumpington to the right of us. And, byJove! here is the brougham coming round the corner. Quick, Watson,quick, or we are done!"
He sprang through a gate into a field, dragging the reluctant Pompeyafter him. We had hardly got under the shelter of the hedge when thecarriage rattled past. I caught a glimpse of Dr. Armstrong within,his shoulders bowed, his head sunk on his hands, the very image ofdistress. I could tell by my companion's graver face that he also hadseen.
"I fear there is some dark ending to our quest," said he. "It cannotbe long before we know it. Come, Pompey! Ah, it is the cottage in thefield!"
There could be no doubt that we had reached the end of our journey.Pompey ran about and whined eagerly outside the gate where the marksof the brougham's wheels were still to be seen. A footpath led acrossto the lonely cottage. Holmes tied the dog to the hedge, and wehastened onwards. My friend knocked at the little rustic door, andknocked again without response. And yet the cottage was not deserted,for a low sound came to our ears--a kind of drone of misery anddespair, which was indescribably melancholy. Holmes pausedirresolute, and then he glanced back at the road which we had justtraversed. A brougham was coming down it, and there could be nomistaking those grey horses.
"By Jove, the doctor is coming back!" cried Holmes. "That settles it.We are bound to see what it means before he comes."
He opened the door and we stepped into the hall. The droning soundswelled louder upon our ears until it became one long, deep wail ofdistress. It came from upstairs. Holmes darted up and I followed him.He pushed open a half-closed door and we both stood appalled at thesight before us.
A woman, young and beautiful, was lying dead upon the bed. Her calm,pale face, with dim, wide-opened blue eyes, looked upward from amid agreat tangle of golden hair. At the foot of the bed, half sitting,half kneeling, his face buried in the clothes, was a young man, whoseframe was racked by his sobs. So absorbed was he by his bitter griefthat he never looked up until Holmes's hand was on his shoulder.
"Are you Mr. Godfrey Staunton?"
"Yes, yes; I am--but you are too late. She is dead."
The man was so dazed that he could not be made to understand that wewere anything but doctors who had been sent to his assistance. Holmeswas endeavouring to utter a few words of consolation, and to explainthe alarm which had been caused to his friends by his suddendisappearance, when there was a step upon the stairs, and there wasthe heavy, stern, questioning face of Dr. Armstrong at the door.
"So, gentlemen," said he, "you have attained your end, and havecertainly chosen a particularly delicate moment for your intrusion. Iwould not brawl in the presence of death, but I can assure you thatif I were a younger man your monstrous conduct would not pass withimpunity."
"Excuse me, Dr. Armstrong, I think we are a little atcross-purposes," said my friend, with dignity. "If you could stepdownstairs with us we may each be able to give some light to theother upon this miserable affair."
A minute later the grim doctor and ourselves were in the sitting-roombelow.
"Well, sir?" said he.
"I wish you to understand, in the first place, that I am not employedby Lord Mount-James, and that my sympathies in this matter areentirely against that nobleman. When a man is lost it is my duty toascertain his fate, but having done so the matter ends so far as I amconcerned; and so long as there is nothing criminal, I am much moreanxious to hush up private scandals than to give them publicity. If,as I imagine, there is no breach of the law in this matter, you canabsolutely depend upon my discretion and my co-operation in keepingthe facts out of the papers."
Dr. Armstrong took a quick step forward and wrung Holmes by the hand.
"You are a good fellow," said he. "I had misjudged you. I thankHeaven that my compunction at leaving poor Staunton all alone in thisplight caused me to turn my carriage back, and so to make youracquaintance. Knowing as much as you do, the situation is very easilyexplained. A year ago Godfrey Staunton lodged in London for a time,and became passionately attached to his landlady's daughter, whom hemarried. She was as good as she was beautiful, and as intelligent asshe was good. No man need be ashamed of such a wife. But Godfrey wasthe heir to this crabbed old nobleman, and it was quite certain thatthe news of his marriage would have been the end of his inheritance.I knew the lad well, and I loved him for his many excellentqualities. I did all I could to help him to keep things straight. Wedid our very best to keep the thing from everyone, for when once sucha whisper gets about it is not long before everyone has heard it.Thanks to this lonely cottage and his own discretion, Godfrey has upto now succeeded. Their secret was known to no one save to me and toone excellent servant who has at present gone for assistance toTrumpington. But at last there came a terrible blow in the shape ofdangerous illness to his wife. It was consumption of the mostvirulent kind. The poor boy was half crazed with grief, and yet hehad to go to London to play this match, for he could not get out ofit without explanations which would expose his secret. I tried tocheer him up by a wire, and he sent me one in reply imploring me todo all I could. This was the telegram which you appear in someinexplicable way to have seen. I did not tell him how urgent thedanger was, for I knew that he could do no good here, but I sent thetruth to the girl's father, and he very injudiciously communicated itto Godfrey. The result was that he came straight away in a statebordering on frenzy, and has remained in the same state, kneeling atthe end of her bed, until this morning death put an end to hersufferings. That is all, Mr. Holmes, and I am sure that I can relyupon your discretion and that of your friend."
Holmes grasped the doctor's hand.
"Come, Watson," said he, and we passed from that house of grief intothe pale sunlight of the winter day.





                   THE ADVENTURE OF THE ABBEY GRANGE
It was on a bitterly cold and frosty morning during the winter of '97that I was awakened by a tugging at my shoulder. It was Holmes. Thecandle in his hand shone upon his eager, stooping face and told me ata glance that something was amiss.
"Come, Watson, come!" he cried. "The game is afoot. Not a word! Intoyour clothes and come!"
Ten minutes later we were both in a cab and rattling through thesilent streets on our way to Charing Cross Station. The first faintwinter's dawn was beginning to appear, and we could dimly see theoccasional figure of an early workman as he passed us, blurred andindistinct in the opalescent London reek. Holmes nestled in silenceinto his heavy coat, and I was glad to do the same, for the air wasmost bitter and neither of us had broken our fast. It was not untilwe had consumed some hot tea at the station, and taken our places inthe Kentish train, that we were sufficiently thawed, he to speak andI to listen. Holmes drew a note from his pocket and read it aloud:
"Abbey Grange, Marsham, Kent,"3.30 a.m."My dear Mr. Holmes:"I should be very glad of your immediate assistance in what promisesto be a most remarkable case. It is something quite in your line.Except for releasing the lady I will see that everything is keptexactly as I have found it, but I beg you not to lose an instant, asit is difficult to leave Sir Eustace there."Yours faithfully,"Stanley Hopkins."
"Hopkins has called me in seven times, and on each occasion hissummons has been entirely justified," said Holmes. "I fancy thatevery one of his cases has found its way into your collection, and Imust admit, Watson, that you have some power of selection whichatones for much which I deplore in your narratives. Your fatal habitof looking at everything from the point of view of a story instead ofas a scientific exercise has ruined what might have been aninstructive and even classical series of demonstrations. You slurover work of the utmost finesse and delicacy in order to dwell uponsensational details which may excite, but cannot possibly instruct,the reader."
"Why do you not write them yourself?" I said, with some bitterness.
"I will, my dear Watson, I will. At present I am, as you know, fairlybusy, but I propose to devote my declining years to the compositionof a text-book which shall focus the whole art of detection into onevolume. Our present research appears to be a case of murder."
"You think this Sir Eustace is dead, then?"
"I should say so. Hopkins's writing shows considerable agitation, andhe is not an emotional man. Yes, I gather there has been violence,and that the body is left for our inspection. A mere suicide wouldnot have caused him to send for me. As to the release of the lady, itwould appear that she has been locked in her room during the tragedy.We are moving in high life, Watson; crackling paper, 'E.B.' monogram,coat-of-arms, picturesque address. I think that friend Hopkins willlive up to his reputation and that we shall have an interestingmorning. The crime was committed before twelve last night."
"How can you possibly tell?"
"By an inspection of the trains and by reckoning the time. The localpolice had to be called in, they had to communicate with ScotlandYard, Hopkins had to go out, and he in turn had to send for me. Allthat makes a fair night's work. Well, here we are at ChislehurstStation, and we shall soon set our doubts at rest."
A drive of a couple of miles through narrow country lanes brought usto a park gate, which was opened for us by an old lodge-keeper, whosehaggard face bore the reflection of some great disaster. The avenueran through a noble park, between lines of ancient elms, and ended ina low, widespread house, pillared in front after the fashion ofPalladio. The central part was evidently of a great age and shroudedin ivy, but the large windows showed that modern changes had beencarried out, and one wing of the house appeared to be entirely new.The youthful figure and alert, eager face of Inspector StanleyHopkins confronted us in the open doorway.
"I'm very glad you have come, Mr. Holmes. And you too, Dr. Watson!But, indeed, if I had my time over again I should not have troubledyou, for since the lady has come to herself she has given so clear anaccount of the affair that there is not much left for us to do. Youremember that Lewisham gang of burglars?"
"What, the three Randalls?"
"Exactly; the father and two sons. It's their work. I have not adoubt of it. They did a job at Sydenham a fortnight ago, and wereseen and described. Rather cool to do another so soon and so near,but it is they, beyond all doubt. It's a hanging matter this time."
"Sir Eustace is dead, then?"
"Yes; his head was knocked in with his own poker."
"Sir Eustace Brackenstall, the driver tells me."
"Exactly--one of the richest men in Kent. Lady Brackenstall is in themorning-room. Poor lady, she has had a most dreadful experience. Sheseemed half dead when I saw her first. I think you had best see herand hear her account of the facts. Then we will examine thedining-room together."
Lady Brackenstall was no ordinary person. Seldom have I seen sograceful a figure, so womanly a presence, and so beautiful a face.She was a blonde, golden-haired, blue-eyed, and would, no doubt, havehad the perfect complexion which goes with such colouring had not herrecent experience left her drawn and haggard. Her sufferings werephysical as well as mental, for over one eye rose a hideous,plum-coloured swelling, which her maid, a tall, austere woman, wasbathing assiduously with vinegar and water. The lady lay backexhausted upon a couch, but her quick, observant gaze as we enteredthe room, and the alert expression of her beautiful features, showedthat neither her wits nor her courage had been shaken by her terribleexperience. She was enveloped in a loose dressing-gown of blue andsilver, but a black sequin-covered dinner-dress was hung upon thecouch beside her.
"I have told you all that happened, Mr. Hopkins," she said, wearily;"could you not repeat it for me? Well, if you think it necessary, Iwill tell these gentlemen what occurred. Have they been in thedining-room yet?"
"I thought they had better hear your ladyship's story first."
"I shall be glad when you can arrange matters. It is horrible to meto think of him still lying there." She shuddered and buried her facein her hands. As she did so the loose gown fell back from herforearms. Holmes uttered an exclamation.
"You have other injuries, madam! What is this?" Two vivid red spotsstood out on one of the white, round limbs. She hastily covered it.
"It is nothing. It has no connection with the hideous business oflast night. If you and your friend will sit down I will tell you allI can.
"I am the wife of Sir Eustace Brackenstall. I have been married abouta year. I suppose that it is no use my attempting to conceal that ourmarriage has not been a happy one. I fear that all our neighbourswould tell you that, even if I were to attempt to deny it. Perhapsthe fault may be partly mine. I was brought up in the freer, lessconventional atmosphere of South Australia, and this English life,with its proprieties and its primness, is not congenial to me. Butthe main reason lies in the one fact which is notorious to everyone,and that is that Sir Eustace was a confirmed drunkard. To be withsuch a man for an hour is unpleasant. Can you imagine what it meansfor a sensitive and high-spirited woman to be tied to him for day andnight? It is a sacrilege, a crime, a villainy to hold that such amarriage is binding. I say that these monstrous laws of yours willbring a curse upon the land--Heaven will not let such wickednessendure." For an instant she sat up, her cheeks flushed, and her eyesblazing from under the terrible mark upon her brow. Then the strong,soothing hand of the austere maid drew her head down on to thecushion, and the wild anger died away into passionate sobbing. Atlast she continued:--
"I will tell you about last night. You are aware, perhaps, that inthis house all servants sleep in the modern wing. This central blockis made up of the dwelling-rooms, with the kitchen behind and ourbedroom above. My maid Theresa sleeps above my room. There is no oneelse, and no sound could alarm those who are in the farther wing.This must have been well known to the robbers, or they would not haveacted as they did.
"Sir Eustace retired about half-past ten. The servants had alreadygone to their quarters. Only my maid was up, and she had remained inher room at the top of the house until I needed her services. I satuntil after eleven in this room, absorbed in a book. Then I walkedround to see that all was right before I went upstairs. It was mycustom to do this myself, for, as I have explained, Sir Eustace wasnot always to be trusted. I went into the kitchen, the butler'spantry, the gun-room, the billiard-room, the drawing-room, andfinally the dining-room. As I approached the window, which is coveredwith thick curtains, I suddenly felt the wind blow upon my face andrealized that it was open. I flung the curtain aside and found myselfface to face with a broad-shouldered, elderly man who had juststepped into the room. The window is a long French one, which reallyforms a door leading to the lawn. I held my bedroom candle lit in myhand, and, by its light, behind the first man I saw two others, whowere in the act of entering. I stepped back, but the fellow was on mein an instant. He caught me first by the wrist and then by thethroat. I opened my mouth to scream, but he struck me a savage blowwith his fist over the eye, and felled me to the ground. I must havebeen unconscious for a few minutes, for when I came to myself I foundthat they had torn down the bell-rope and had secured me tightly tothe oaken chair which stands at the head of the dining-room table. Iwas so firmly bound that I could not move, and a handkerchief roundmy mouth prevented me from uttering any sound. It was at this instantthat my unfortunate husband entered the room. He had evidently heardsome suspicious sounds, and he came prepared for such a scene as hefound. He was dressed in his shirt and trousers, with his favouriteblackthorn cudgel in his hand. He rushed at one of the burglars, butanother--it was the elderly man--stooped, picked the poker out of thegrate, and struck him a horrible blow as he passed. He fell without agroan, and never moved again. I fainted once more, but again it couldonly have been a very few minutes during which I was insensible. WhenI opened my eyes I found that they had collected the silver from thesideboard, and they had drawn a bottle of wine which stood there.Each of them had a glass in his hand. I have already told you, have Inot, that one was elderly, with a beard, and the others young,hairless lads. They might have been a father with his two sons. Theytalked together in whispers. Then they came over and made sure that Iwas still securely bound. Finally they withdrew, closing the windowafter them. It was quite a quarter of an hour before I got my mouthfree. When I did so my screams brought the maid to my assistance. Theother servants were soon alarmed, and we sent for the local police,who instantly communicated with London. That is really all that I cantell you, gentlemen, and I trust that it will not be necessary for meto go over so painful a story again."
"Any questions, Mr. Holmes?" asked Hopkins.
"I will not impose any further tax upon Lady Brackenstall's patienceand time," said Holmes. "Before I go into the dining-room I shouldlike to hear your experience." He looked at the maid.
"I saw the men before ever they came into the house," said she. "As Isat by my bedroom window I saw three men in the moonlight down by thelodge gate yonder, but I thought nothing of it at the time. It wasmore than an hour after that I heard my mistress scream, and down Iran, to find her, poor lamb, just as she says, and him on the floorwith his blood and brains over the room. It was enough to drive awoman out of her wits, tied there, and her very dress spotted withhim; but she never wanted courage, did Miss Mary Fraser of Adelaide,and Lady Brackenstall of Abbey Grange hasn't learned new ways. You'vequestioned her long enough, you gentlemen, and now she is coming toher own room, just with her old Theresa, to get the rest that shebadly needs."
With a motherly tenderness the gaunt woman put her arm round hermistress and led her from the room.
"She has been with her all her life," said Hopkins. "Nursed her as ababy, and came with her to England when they first left Australiaeighteen months ago. Theresa Wright is her name, and the kind of maidyou don't pick up nowadays. This way, Mr. Holmes, if you please!"
The keen interest had passed out of Holmes's expressive face, and Iknew that with the mystery all the charm of the case had departed.There still remained an arrest to be effected, but what were thesecommonplace rogues that he should soil his hands with them? Anabstruse and learned specialist who finds that he has been called infor a case of measles would experience something of the annoyancewhich I read in my friend's eyes. Yet the scene in the dining-room ofthe Abbey Grange was sufficiently strange to arrest his attention andto recall his waning interest.
It was a very large and high chamber, with carved oak ceiling, oakenpanelling, and a fine array of deer's heads and ancient weaponsaround the walls. At the farther end from the door was the highFrench window of which we had heard. Three smaller windows on theright-hand side filled the apartment with cold winter sunshine. Onthe left was a large, deep fireplace, with a massive, over-hangingoak mantelpiece. Beside the fireplace was a heavy oaken chair witharms and cross-bars at the bottom. In and out through the openwoodwork was woven a crimson cord, which was secured at each side tothe crosspiece below. In releasing the lady the cord had been slippedoff her, but the knots with which it had been secured still remained.These details only struck our attention afterwards, for our thoughtswere entirely absorbed by the terrible object which lay upon thetiger-skin hearthrug in front of the fire.
It was the body of a tall, well-made man, about forty years of age.He lay upon his back, his face upturned, with his white teethgrinning through his short black beard. His two clenched hands wereraised above his head, and a heavy blackthorn stick lay across them.His dark, handsome, aquiline features were convulsed into a spasm ofvindictive hatred, which had set his dead face in a terribly fiendishexpression. He had evidently been in his bed when the alarm hadbroken out, for he wore a foppish embroidered night-shirt, and hisbare feet projected from his trousers. His head was horribly injured,and the whole room bore witness to the savage ferocity of the blowwhich had struck him down. Beside him lay the heavy poker, bent intoa curve by the concussion. Holmes examined both it and theindescribable wreck which it had wrought.
"He must be a powerful man, this elder Randall," he remarked.
"Yes," said Hopkins. "I have some record of the fellow, and he is arough customer."
"You should have no difficulty in getting him."
"Not the slightest. We have been on the look-out for him, and therewas some idea that he had got away to America. Now that we know thegang are here I don't see how they can escape. We have the news atevery seaport already, and a reward will be offered before evening.What beats me is how they could have done so mad a thing, knowingthat the lady could describe them, and that we could not fail torecognise the description."
"Exactly. One would have expected that they would have silenced LadyBrackenstall as well."
"They may not have realized," I suggested, "that she had recoveredfrom her faint."
"That is likely enough. If she seemed to be senseless they would nottake her life. What about this poor fellow, Hopkins? I seem to haveheard some queer stories about him."
"He was a good-hearted man when he was sober, but a perfect fiendwhen he was drunk, or rather when he was half drunk, for he seldomreally went the whole way. The devil seemed to be in him at suchtimes, and he was capable of anything. From what I hear, in spite ofall his wealth and his title, he very nearly came our way once ortwice. There was a scandal about his drenching a dog with petroleumand setting it on fire--her ladyship's dog, to make the matterworse--and that was only hushed up with difficulty. Then he threw adecanter at that maid, Theresa Wright; there was trouble about that.On the whole, and between ourselves, it will be a brighter housewithout him. What are you looking at now?"
Holmes was down on his knees examining with great attention the knotsupon the red cord with which the lady had been secured. Then hecarefully scrutinized the broken and frayed end where it had snappedoff when the burglar had dragged it down.
"When this was pulled down the bell in the kitchen must have rungloudly," he remarked.
"No one could hear it. The kitchen stands right at the back of thehouse."
"How did the burglar know no one would hear it? How dared he pull ata bell-rope in that reckless fashion?"
"Exactly, Mr. Holmes, exactly. You put the very question which I haveasked myself again and again. There can be no doubt that this fellowmust have known the house and its habits. He must have perfectlyunderstood that the servants would all be in bed at thatcomparatively early hour, and that no one could possibly hear a bellring in the kitchen. Therefore he must have been in close league withone of the servants. Surely that is evident. But there are eightservants, and all of good character."
"Other things being equal," said Holmes, "one would suspect the oneat whose head the master threw a decanter. And yet that would involvetreachery towards the mistress to whom this woman seems devoted.Well, well, the point is a minor one, and when you have Randall youwill probably find no difficulty in securing his accomplice. Thelady's story certainly seems to be corroborated, if it neededcorroboration, by every detail which we see before us." He walked tothe French window and threw it open. "There are no signs here, butthe ground is iron hard, and one would not expect them. I see thatthese candles on the mantelpiece have been lighted."
"Yes; it was by their light and that of the lady's bedroom candlethat the burglars saw their way about."
"And what did they take?"
"Well, they did not take much--only half-a-dozen articles of plateoff the sideboard. Lady Brackenstall thinks that they were themselvesso disturbed by the death of Sir Eustace that they did not ransackthe house as they would otherwise have done."
"No doubt that is true. And yet they drank some wine, I understand."
"To steady their own nerves."
"Exactly. These three glasses upon the sideboard have been untouched,I suppose?"
"Yes; and the bottle stands as they left it."
"Let us look at it. Halloa! halloa! what is this?"
The three glasses were grouped together, all of them tinged withwine, and one of them containing some dregs of bees-wing. The bottlestood near them, two-thirds full, and beside it lay a long,deeply-stained cork. Its appearance and the dust upon the bottleshowed that it was no common vintage which the murderers had enjoyed.
A change had come over Holmes's manner. He had lost his listlessexpression, and again I saw an alert light of interest in his keen,deep-set eyes. He raised the cork and examined it minutely.
"How did they draw it?" he asked.
Hopkins pointed to a half-opened drawer. In it lay some table linenand a large cork-screw.
"Did Lady Brackenstall say that screw was used?"
"No; you remember that she was senseless at the moment when thebottle was opened."
"Quite so. As a matter of fact that screw was not used. This bottlewas opened by a pocket-screw, probably contained in a knife, and notmore than an inch and a half long. If you examine the top of the corkyou will observe that the screw was driven in three times before thecork was extracted. It has never been transfixed. This long screwwould have transfixed it and drawn it with a single pull. When youcatch this fellow you will find that he has one of these multiplexknives in his possession."
"Excellent!" said Hopkins.
"But these glasses do puzzle me, I confess. Lady Brackenstallactually saw the three men drinking, did she not?"
"Yes; she was clear about that."
"Then there is an end of it. What more is to be said? And yet youmust admit that the three glasses are very remarkable, Hopkins. What,you see nothing remarkable! Well, well, let it pass. Perhaps when aman has special knowledge and special powers like my own it ratherencourages him to seek a complex explanation when a simpler one is athand. Of course, it must be a mere chance about the glasses. Well,good morning, Hopkins. I don't see that I can be of any use to you,and you appear to have your case very clear. You will let me knowwhen Randall is arrested, and any further developments which mayoccur. I trust that I shall soon have to congratulate you upon asuccessful conclusion. Come, Watson, I fancy that we may employourselves more profitably at home."
During our return journey I could see by Holmes's face that he wasmuch puzzled by something which he had observed. Every now and then,by an effort, he would throw off the impression and talk as if thematter were clear, but then his doubts would settle down upon himagain, and his knitted brows and abstracted eyes would show that histhoughts had gone back once more to the great dining-room of theAbbey Grange in which this midnight tragedy had been enacted. Atlast, by a sudden impulse, just as our train was crawling out of asuburban station, he sprang on to the platform and pulled me outafter him.
"Excuse me, my dear fellow," said he, as we watched the rearcarriages of our train disappearing round a curve; "I am sorry tomake you the victim of what may seem a mere whim, but on my life,Watson, I simply can't leave that case in this condition. Everyinstinct that I possess cries out against it. It's wrong--it's allwrong--I'll swear that it's wrong. And yet the lady's story wascomplete, the maid's corroboration was sufficient, the detail wasfairly exact. What have I to put against that? Three wine-glasses,that is all. But if I had not taken things for granted, if I hadexamined everything with care which I would have shown had weapproached the case de novo and had no cut-and-dried story to warp mymind, would I not then have found something more definite to go upon?Of course I should. Sit down on this bench, Watson, until a train forChislehurst arrives, and allow me to lay the evidence before you,imploring you in the first instance to dismiss from your mind theidea that anything which the maid or her mistress may have said mustnecessarily be true. The lady's charming personality must not bepermitted to warp our judgment.
"Surely there are details in her story which, if we looked at it incold blood, would excite our suspicion. These burglars made aconsiderable haul at Sydenham a fortnight ago. Some account of themand of their appearance was in the papers, and would naturally occurto anyone who wished to invent a story in which imaginary robbersshould play a part. As a matter of fact, burglars who have done agood stroke of business are, as a rule, only too glad to enjoy theproceeds in peace and quiet without embarking on another perilousundertaking. Again, it is unusual for burglars to operate at so earlyan hour; it is unusual for burglars to strike a lady to prevent herscreaming, since one would imagine that was the sure way to make herscream; it is unusual for them to commit murder when their numbersare sufficient to overpower one man; it is unusual for them to becontent with a limited plunder when there is much more within theirreach; and finally I should say that it was very unusual for such mento leave a bottle half empty. How do all these unusuals strike you,Watson?"
"Their cumulative effect is certainly considerable, and yet each ofthem is quite possible in itself. The most unusual thing of all, asit seems to me, is that the lady should be tied to the chair."
"Well, I am not so clear about that, Watson; for it is evident thatthey must either kill her or else secure her in such a way that shecould not give immediate notice of their escape. But at any rate Ihave shown, have I not, that there is a certain element ofimprobability about the lady's story? And now on the top of thiscomes the incident of the wine-glasses."
"What about the wine-glasses?"
"Can you see them in your mind's eye?"
"I see them clearly."
"We are told that three men drank from them. Does that strike you aslikely?"
"Why not? There was wine in each glass."
"Exactly; but there was bees-wing only in one glass. You must havenoticed that fact. What does that suggest to your mind?"
"The last glass filled would be most likely to contain bees-wing."
"Not at all. The bottle was full of it, and it is inconceivable thatthe first two glasses were clear and the third heavily charged withit. There are two possible explanations, and only two. One is thatafter the second glass was filled the bottle was violently agitated,and so the third glass received the bees-wing. That does not appearprobable. No, no; I am sure that I am right."
"What, then, do you suppose?"
"That only two glasses were used, and that the dregs of both werepoured into a third glass, so as to give the false impression thatthree people had been here. In that way all the bees-wing would be inthe last glass, would it not? Yes, I am convinced that this is so.But if I have hit upon the true explanation of this one smallphenomenon, then in an instant the case rises from the commonplace tothe exceedingly remarkable, for it can only mean that LadyBrackenstall and her maid have deliberately lied to us, that not oneword of their story is to be believed, that they have some verystrong reason for covering the real criminal, and that we mustconstruct our case for ourselves without any help from them. That isthe mission which now lies before us, and here, Watson, is theChislehurst train."
The household of the Abbey Grange were much surprised at our return,but Sherlock Holmes, finding that Stanley Hopkins had gone off toreport to head-quarters, took possession of the dining-room, lockedthe door upon the inside, and devoted himself for two hours to one ofthose minute and laborious investigations which formed the solidbasis on which his brilliant edifices of deduction were reared.Seated in a corner like an interested student who observes thedemonstration of his professor, I followed every step of thatremarkable research. The window, the curtains, the carpet, the chair,the rope--each in turn was minutely examined and duly pondered. Thebody of the unfortunate baronet had been removed, but all elseremained as we had seen it in the morning. Then, to my astonishment,Holmes climbed up on to the massive mantelpiece. Far above his headhung the few inches of red cord which were still attached to thewire. For a long time he gazed upward at it, and then in an attemptto get nearer to it he rested his knee upon a wooden bracket on thewall. This brought his hand within a few inches of the broken end ofthe rope, but it was not this so much as the bracket itself whichseemed to engage his attention. Finally he sprang down with anejaculation of satisfaction.
"It's all right, Watson," said he. "We have got our case--one of themost remarkable in our collection. But, dear me, how slow-witted Ihave been, and how nearly I have committed the blunder of mylifetime! Now, I think that with a few missing links my chain isalmost complete."
"You have got your men?"
"Man, Watson, man. Only one, but a very formidable person. Strong asa lion--witness the blow that bent that poker. Six foot three inheight, active as a squirrel, dexterous with his fingers; finally,remarkably quick-witted, for this whole ingenious story is of hisconcoction. Yes, Watson, we have come upon the handiwork of a veryremarkable individual. And yet in that bell-rope he has given us aclue which should not have left us a doubt."
"Where was the clue?"
"Well, if you were to pull down a bell-rope, Watson, where would youexpect it to break? Surely at the spot where it is attached to thewire. Why should it break three inches from the top as this one hasdone?"
"Because it is frayed there?"
"Exactly. This end, which we can examine, is frayed. He was cunningenough to do that with his knife. But the other end is not frayed.You could not observe that from here, but if you were on themantelpiece you would see that it is cut clean off without any markof fraying whatever. You can reconstruct what occurred. The manneeded the rope. He would not tear it down for fear of giving thealarm by ringing the bell. What did he do? He sprang up on themantelpiece, could not quite reach it, put his knee on thebracket--you will see the impression in the dust--and so got hisknife to bear upon the cord. I could not reach the place by at leastthree inches, from which I infer that he is at least three inches abigger man than I. Look at that mark upon the seat of the oakenchair! What is it?"
"Blood."
"Undoubtedly it is blood. This alone puts the lady's story out ofcourt. If she were seated on the chair when the crime was done, howcomes that mark? No, no; she was placed in the chair after the deathof her husband. I'll wager that the black dress shows a correspondingmark to this. We have not yet met our Waterloo, Watson, but this isour Marengo, for it begins in defeat and ends in victory. I shouldlike now to have a few words with the nurse Theresa. We must be waryfor awhile, if we are to get the information which we want."
She was an interesting person, this stern Australian nurse. Taciturn,suspicious, ungracious, it took some time before Holmes's pleasantmanner and frank acceptance of all that she said thawed her into acorresponding amiability. She did not attempt to conceal her hatredfor her late employer.
"Yes, sir, it is true that he threw the decanter at me. I heard himcall my mistress a name, and I told him that he would not dare tospeak so if her brother had been there. Then it was that he threw itat me. He might have thrown a dozen if he had but left my bonny birdalone. He was for ever illtreating her, and she too proud tocomplain. She will not even tell me all that he has done to her. Shenever told me of those marks on her arm that you saw this morning,but I know very well that they come from a stab with a hat-pin. Thesly fiend--Heaven forgive me that I should speak of him so, now thathe is dead, but a fiend he was if ever one walked the earth. He wasall honey when first we met him, only eighteen months ago, and weboth feel as if it were eighteen years. She had only just arrived inLondon. Yes, it was her first voyage--she had never been from homebefore. He won her with his title and his money and his false Londonways. If she made a mistake she has paid for it, if ever a woman did.What month did we meet him? Well, I tell you it was just after wearrived. We arrived in June, and it was July. They were married inJanuary of last year. Yes, she is down in the morning-room again, andI have no doubt she will see you, but you must not ask too much ofher, for she has gone through all that flesh and blood will stand."
Lady Brackenstall was reclining on the same couch, but lookedbrighter than before. The maid had entered with us, and began oncemore to foment the bruise upon her mistress's brow.
"I hope," said the lady, "that you have not come to cross-examine meagain?"
"No," Holmes answered, in his gentlest voice, "I will not cause youany unnecessary trouble, Lady Brackenstall, and my whole desire is tomake things easy for you, for I am convinced that you are amuch-tried woman. If you will treat me as a friend and trust me youmay find that I will justify your trust."
"What do you want me to do?"
"To tell me the truth."
"Mr. Holmes!"
"No, no, Lady Brackenstall, it is no use. You may have heard of anylittle reputation which I possess. I will stake it all on the factthat your story is an absolute fabrication."
Mistress and maid were both staring at Holmes with pale faces andfrightened eyes.
"You are an impudent fellow!" cried Theresa. "Do you mean to say thatmy mistress has told a lie?"
Holmes rose from his chair.
"Have you nothing to tell me?"
"I have told you everything."
"Think once more, Lady Brackenstall. Would it not be better to befrank?"
For an instant there was hesitation in her beautiful face. Then somenew strong thought caused it to set like a mask.
"I have told you all I know."
Holmes took his hat and shrugged his shoulders. "I am sorry," hesaid, and without another word we left the room and the house. Therewas a pond in the park, and to this my friend led the way. It wasfrozen over, but a single hole was left for the convenience of asolitary swan. Holmes gazed at it and then passed on to the lodgegate. There he scribbled a short note for Stanley Hopkins and left itwith the lodge-keeper.
"It may be a hit or it may be a miss, but we are bound to dosomething for friend Hopkins, just to justify this second visit,"said he. "I will not quite take him into my confidence yet. I thinkour next scene of operations must be the shipping office of theAdelaide-Southampton line, which stands at the end of Pall Mall, if Iremember right. There is a second line of steamers which connectSouth Australia with England, but we will draw the larger coverfirst."
Holmes's card sent in to the manager ensured instant attention, andhe was not long in acquiring all the information which he needed. InJune of '95 only one of their line had reached a home port. It wasthe Rock of Gibraltar, their largest and best boat. A reference tothe passenger list showed that Miss Fraser of Adelaide, with hermaid, had made the voyage in her. The boat was now on her way toAustralia, somewhere to the south of the Suez Canal. Her officerswere the same as in '95, with one exception. The first officer, Mr.Jack Croker, had been made a captain and was to take charge of theirnew ship, the Bass Rock, sailing in two days' time from Southampton.He lived at Sydenham, but he was likely to be in that morning forinstructions, if we cared to wait for him.
No; Mr. Holmes had no desire to see him, but would be glad to knowmore about his record and character.
His record was magnificent. There was not an officer in the fleet totouch him. As to his character, he was reliable on duty, but a wild,desperate fellow off the deck of his ship, hot-headed, excitable, butloyal, honest, and kind-hearted. That was the pith of the informationwith which Holmes left the office of the Adelaide-Southamptoncompany. Thence he drove to Scotland Yard, but instead of entering hesat in his cab with his brows drawn down, lost in profound thought.Finally he drove round to the Charing Cross telegraph office, sentoff a message, and then, at last, we made for Baker Street once more.
"No, I couldn't do it, Watson," said he, as we re-entered our room."Once that warrant was made out nothing on earth would save him. Onceor twice in my career I feel that I have done more real harm by mydiscovery of the criminal than ever he had done by his crime. I havelearned caution now, and I had rather play tricks with the law ofEngland than with my own conscience. Let us know a little more beforewe act."
Before evening we had a visit from Inspector Stanley Hopkins. Thingswere not going very well with him.
"I believe that you are a wizard, Mr. Holmes. I really do sometimesthink that you have powers that are not human. Now, how on earthcould you know that the stolen silver was at the bottom of thatpond?"
"I didn't know it."
"But you told me to examine it."
"You got it, then?"
"Yes, I got it."
"I am very glad if I have helped you."
"But you haven't helped me. You have made the affair far moredifficult. What sort of burglars are they who steal silver and thenthrow it into the nearest pond?"
"It was certainly rather eccentric behaviour. I was merely going onthe idea that if the silver had been taken by persons who did notwant it, who merely took it for a blind as it were, then they wouldnaturally be anxious to get rid of it."
"But why should such an idea cross your mind?"
"Well, I thought it was possible. When they came out through theFrench window there was the pond, with one tempting little hole inthe ice, right in front of their noses. Could there be a betterhiding-place?"
"Ah, a hiding-place--that is better!" cried Stanley Hopkins. "Yes,yes, I see it all now! It was early, there were folk upon the roads,they were afraid of being seen with the silver, so they sank it inthe pond, intending to return for it when the coast was clear.Excellent, Mr. Holmes--that is better than your idea of a blind."
"Quite so; you have got an admirable theory. I have no doubt that myown ideas were quite wild, but you must admit that they have ended indiscovering the silver."
"Yes, sir, yes. It was all your doing. But I have had a badset-back."
"A set-back?"
"Yes, Mr. Holmes. The Randall gang were arrested in New York thismorning."
"Dear me, Hopkins! That is certainly rather against your theory thatthey committed a murder in Kent last night."
"It is fatal, Mr. Holmes, absolutely fatal. Still, there are othergangs of three besides the Randalls, or it may be some new gang ofwhich the police have never heard."
"Quite so; it is perfectly possible. What, are you off?"
"Yes, Mr. Holmes; there is no rest for me until I have got to thebottom of the business. I suppose you have no hint to give me?"
"I have given you one."
"Which?"
"Well, I suggested a blind."
"But why, Mr. Holmes, why?"
"Ah, that's the question, of course. But I commend the idea to yourmind. You might possibly find that there was something in it. Youwon't stop for dinner? Well, good-bye, and let us know how you geton."
Dinner was over and the table cleared before Holmes alluded to thematter again. He had lit his pipe and held his slippered feet to thecheerful blaze of the fire. Suddenly he looked at his watch.
"I expect developments, Watson."
"When?"
"Now--within a few minutes. I dare say you thought I acted ratherbadly to Stanley Hopkins just now?"
"I trust your judgment."
"A very sensible reply, Watson. You must look at it this way: what Iknow is unofficial; what he knows is official. I have the right toprivate judgment, but he has none. He must disclose all, or he is atraitor to his service. In a doubtful case I would not put him in sopainful a position, and so I reserve my information until my own mindis clear upon the matter."
"But when will that be?"
"The time has come. You will now be present at the last scene of aremarkable little drama."
There was a sound upon the stairs, and our door was opened to admitas fine a specimen of manhood as ever passed through it. He was avery tall young man, golden-moustached, blue-eyed, with a skin whichhad been burned by tropical suns, and a springy step which showedthat the huge frame was as active as it was strong. He closed thedoor behind him, and then he stood with clenched hands and heavingbreast, choking down some overmastering emotion.
"Sit down, Captain Croker. You got my telegram?"
Our visitor sank into an arm-chair and looked from one to the otherof us with questioning eyes.
"I got your telegram, and I came at the hour you said. I heard thatyou had been down to the office. There was no getting away from you.Let's hear the worst. What are you going to do with me? Arrest me?Speak out, man! You can't sit there and play with me like a cat witha mouse."
"Give him a cigar," said Holmes. "Bite on that, Captain Croker, anddon't let your nerves run away with you. I should not sit heresmoking with you if I thought that you were a common criminal, youmay be sure of that. Be frank with me, and we may do some good. Playtricks with me, and I'll crush you."
"What do you wish me to do?"
"To give me a true account of all that happened at the Abbey Grangelast night--a true account, mind you, with nothing added and nothingtaken off. I know so much already that if you go one inch off thestraight I'll blow this police whistle from my window and the affairgoes out of my hands for ever."
The sailor thought for a little. Then he struck his leg with hisgreat, sun-burned hand.
"I'll chance it," he cried. "I believe you are a man of your word,and a white man, and I'll tell you the whole story. But one thing Iwill say first. So far as I am concerned I regret nothing and I fearnothing, and I would do it all again and be proud of the job. Cursethe beast, if he had as many lives as a cat he would owe them all tome! But it's the lady, Mary--Mary Fraser--for never will I call herby that accursed name. When I think of getting her into trouble, Iwho would give my life just to bring one smile to her dear face, it'sthat that turns my soul into water. And yet--and yet--what less couldI do? I'll tell you my story, gentlemen, and then I'll ask you as manto man what less could I do.
"I must go back a bit. You seem to know everything, so I expect thatyou know that I met her when she was a passenger and I was firstofficer of the Rock of Gibraltar. From the first day I met her shewas the only woman to me. Every day of that voyage I loved her more,and many a time since have I kneeled down in the darkness of thenight watch and kissed the deck of that ship because I knew her dearfeet had trod it. She was never engaged to me. She treated me asfairly as ever a woman treated a man. I have no complaint to make. Itwas all love on my side, and all good comradeship and friendship onhers. When we parted she was a free woman, but I could never again bea free man.
"Next time I came back from sea I heard of her marriage. Well, whyshouldn't she marry whom she liked? Title and money--who could carrythem better than she? She was born for all that is beautiful anddainty. I didn't grieve over her marriage. I was not such a selfishhound as that. I just rejoiced that good luck had come her way, andthat she had not thrown herself away on a penniless sailor. That'show I loved Mary Fraser.
"Well, I never thought to see her again; but last voyage I waspromoted, and the new boat was not yet launched, so I had to wait fora couple of months with my people at Sydenham. One day out in acountry lane I met Theresa Wright, her old maid. She told me abouther, about him, about everything. I tell you, gentlemen, it nearlydrove me mad. This drunken hound, that he should dare to raise hishand to her whose boots he was not worthy to lick! I met Theresaagain. Then I met Mary herself--and met her again. Then she wouldmeet me no more. But the other day I had a notice that I was to starton my voyage within a week, and I determined that I would see heronce before I left. Theresa was always my friend, for she loved Maryand hated this villain almost as much as I did. From her I learnedthe ways of the house. Mary used to sit up reading in her own littleroom downstairs. I crept round there last night and scratched at thewindow. At first she would not open to me, but in her heart I knowthat now she loves me, and she could not leave me in the frostynight. She whispered to me to come round to the big front window, andI found it open before me so as to let me into the dining-room. AgainI heard from her own lips things that made my blood boil, and again Icursed this brute who mishandled the woman that I loved. Well,gentlemen, I was standing with her just inside the window, in allinnocence, as Heaven is my judge, when he rushed like a madman intothe room, called her the vilest name that a man could use to a woman,and welted her across the face with the stick he had in his hand. Ihad sprung for the poker, and it was a fair fight between us. Seehere on my arm where his first blow fell. Then it was my turn, and Iwent through him as if he had been a rotten pumpkin. Do you think Iwas sorry? Not I! It was his life or mine, but far more than that itwas his life or hers, for how could I leave her in the power of thismadman? That was how I killed him. Was I wrong? Well, then, whatwould either of you gentlemen have done if you had been in myposition?
"She had screamed when he struck her, and that brought old Theresadown from the room above. There was a bottle of wine on thesideboard, and I opened it and poured a little between Mary's lips,for she was half dead with the shock. Then I took a drop myself.Theresa was as cool as ice, and it was her plot as much as mine. Wemust make it appear that burglars had done the thing. Theresa kept onrepeating our story to her mistress, while I swarmed up and cut therope of the bell. Then I lashed her in her chair, and frayed out theend of the rope to make it look natural, else they would wonder howin the world a burglar could have got up there to cut it. Then Igathered up a few plates and pots of silver, to carry out the idea ofa robbery, and there I left them with orders to give the alarm when Ihad a quarter of an hour's start. I dropped the silver into the pondand made off for Sydenham, feeling that for once in my life I haddone a real good night's work. And that's the truth and the wholetruth, Mr. Holmes, if it costs me my neck."
Holmes smoked for some time in silence. Then he crossed the room andshook our visitor by the hand.
"That's what I think," said he. "I know that every word is true, foryou have hardly said a word which I did not know. No one but anacrobat or a sailor could have got up to that bell-rope from thebracket, and no one but a sailor could have made the knots with whichthe cord was fastened to the chair. Only once had this lady beenbrought into contact with sailors, and that was on her voyage, and itwas someone of her own class of life, since she was trying hard toshield him and so showing that she loved him. You see how easy it wasfor me to lay my hands upon you when once I had started upon theright trail."
"I thought the police never could have seen through our dodge."
"And the police haven't; nor will they, to the best of my belief.Now, look here, Captain Croker, this is a very serious matter, thoughI am willing to admit that you acted under the most extremeprovocation to which any man could be subjected. I am not sure thatin defence of your own life your action will not be pronouncedlegitimate. However, that is for a British jury to decide. MeanwhileI have so much sympathy for you that if you choose to disappear inthe next twenty-four hours I will promise you that no one will hinderyou."
"And then it will all come out?"
"Certainly it will come out."
The sailor flushed with anger.
"What sort of proposal is that to make a man? I know enough of law tounderstand that Mary would be had as accomplice. Do you think I wouldleave her alone to face the music while I slunk away? No, sir; letthem do their worst upon me, but for Heaven's sake, Mr. Holmes, findsome way of keeping my poor Mary out of the courts."
Holmes for a second time held out his hand to the sailor.
"I was only testing you, and you ring true every time. Well, it is agreat responsibility that I take upon myself, but I have givenHopkins an excellent hint, and if he can't avail himself of it I cando no more. See here, Captain Croker, we'll do this in due form oflaw. You are the prisoner. Watson, you are a British jury, and Inever met a man who was more eminently fitted to represent one. I amthe judge. Now, gentleman of the jury, you have heard the evidence.Do you find the prisoner guilty or not guilty?"
"Not guilty, my lord," said I.
"Vox populi, vox Dei. You are acquitted, Captain Croker. So long asthe law does not find some other victim you are safe from me. Comeback to this lady in a year, and may her future and yours justify usin the judgment which we have pronounced this night."





                   THE ADVENTURE OF THE SECOND STAIN
I had intended "The Adventure of the Abbey Grange" to be the last ofthose exploits of my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, which I should evercommunicate to the public. This resolution of mine was not due to anylack of material, since I have notes of many hundreds of cases towhich I have never alluded, nor was it caused by any waning intereston the part of my readers in the singular personality and uniquemethods of this remarkable man. The real reason lay in the reluctancewhich Mr. Holmes has shown to the continued publication of hisexperiences. So long as he was in actual professional practice therecords of his successes were of some practical value to him; butsince he has definitely retired from London and betaken himself tostudy and bee-farming on the Sussex Downs, notoriety has becomehateful to him, and he has peremptorily requested that his wishes inthis matter should be strictly observed. It was only upon myrepresenting to him that I had given a promise that "The Adventure ofthe Second Stain" should be published when the times were ripe, andpointing out to him that it is only appropriate that this long seriesof episodes should culminate in the most important international casewhich he has ever been called upon to handle, that I at lastsucceeded in obtaining his consent that a carefully-guarded accountof the incident should at last be laid before the public. If intelling the story I seem to be somewhat vague in certain details thepublic will readily understand that there is an excellent reason formy reticence.
It was, then, in a year, and even in a decade, that shall benameless, that upon one Tuesday morning in autumn we found twovisitors of European fame within the walls of our humble room inBaker Street. The one, austere, high-nosed, eagle-eyed, and dominant,was none other than the illustrious Lord Bellinger, twice Premier ofBritain. The other, dark, clear-cut, and elegant, hardly yet ofmiddle age, and endowed with every beauty of body and of mind, wasthe Right Honourable Trelawney Hope, Secretary for European Affairs,and the most rising statesman in the country. They sat side by sideupon our paper-littered settee, and it was easy to see from theirworn and anxious faces that it was business of the most pressingimportance which had brought them. The Premier's thin, blue-veinedhands were clasped tightly over the ivory head of his umbrella, andhis gaunt, ascetic face looked gloomily from Holmes to me. TheEuropean Secretary pulled nervously at his moustache and fidgetedwith the seals of his watch-chain.
"When I discovered my loss, Mr. Holmes, which was at eight o'clockthis morning, I at once informed the Prime Minister. It was at hissuggestion that we have both come to you."
"Have you informed the police?"
"No, sir," said the Prime Minister, with the quick, decisive mannerfor which he was famous. "We have not done so, nor is it possiblethat we should do so. To inform the police must, in the long run,mean to inform the public. This is what we particularly desire toavoid."
"And why, sir?"
"Because the document in question is of such immense importance thatits publication might very easily--I might almost say probably--leadto European complications of the utmost moment. It is not too much tosay that peace or war may hang upon the issue. Unless its recoverycan be attended with the utmost secrecy, then it may as well not berecovered at all, for all that is aimed at by those who have taken itis that its contents should be generally known."
"I understand. Now, Mr. Trelawney Hope, I should be much obliged ifyou would tell me exactly the circumstances under which this documentdisappeared."
"That can be done in a very few words, Mr. Holmes. The letter--for itwas a letter from a foreign potentate--was received six days ago. Itwas of such importance that I have never left it in my safe, but Ihave taken it across each evening to my house in Whitehall Terrace,and kept it in my bedroom in a locked despatch-box. It was there lastnight. Of that I am certain. I actually opened the box while I wasdressing for dinner, and saw the document inside. This morning it wasgone. The despatch-box had stood beside the glass upon mydressing-table all night. I am a light sleeper, and so is my wife. Weare both prepared to swear that no one could have entered the roomduring the night. And yet I repeat that the paper is gone."
"What time did you dine?"
"Half-past seven."
"How long was it before you went to bed?"
"My wife had gone to the theatre. I waited up for her. It washalf-past eleven before we went to our room."
"Then for four hours the despatch-box had lain unguarded?"
"No one is ever permitted to enter that room save the housemaid inthe morning, and my valet, or my wife's maid, during the rest of theday. They are both trusty servants who have been with us for sometime. Besides, neither of them could possibly have known that therewas anything more valuable than the ordinary departmental papers inmy despatch-box."
"Who did know of the existence of that letter?"
"No one in the house."
"Surely your wife knew?"
"No, sir; I had said nothing to my wife until I missed the paper thismorning."
The Premier nodded approvingly.
"I have long known, sir, how high is your sense of public duty," saidhe. "I am convinced that in the case of a secret of this importanceit would rise superior to the most intimate domestic ties."
The European Secretary bowed.
"You do me no more than justice, sir. Until this morning I have neverbreathed one word to my wife upon this matter."
"Could she have guessed?"
"No, Mr. Holmes, she could not have guessed--nor could anyone haveguessed."
"Have you lost any documents before?"
"No, sir."
"Who is there in England who did know of the existence of thisletter?"
"Each member of the Cabinet was informed of it yesterday; but thepledge of secrecy which attends every Cabinet meeting was increasedby the solemn warning which was given by the Prime Minister. Goodheavens, to think that within a few hours I should myself have lostit!" His handsome face was distorted with a spasm of despair, and hishands tore at his hair. For a moment we caught a glimpse of thenatural man, impulsive, ardent, keenly sensitive. The next thearistocratic mask was replaced, and the gentle voice had returned."Besides the members of the Cabinet there are two, or possibly three,departmental officials who know of the letter. No one else inEngland, Mr. Holmes, I assure you."
"But abroad?"
"I believe that no one abroad has seen it save the man who wrote it.I am well convinced that his Ministers--that the usual officialchannels have not been employed."
Holmes considered for some little time.
"Now, sir, I must ask you more particularly what this document is,and why its disappearance should have such momentous consequences?"
The two statesmen exchanged a quick glance and the Premier's shaggyeyebrows gathered in a frown.
"Mr. Holmes, the envelope is a long, thin one of pale blue colour.There is a seal of red wax stamped with a crouching lion. It isaddressed in large, bold handwriting to--"
"I fear, sir," said Holmes, "that, interesting and indeed essentialas these details are, my inquiries must go more to the root ofthings. What was the letter?"
"That is a State secret of the utmost importance, and I fear that Icannot tell you, nor do I see that it is necessary. If by the aid ofthe powers which you are said to possess you can find such anenvelope as I describe with its enclosure, you will have deservedwell of your country, and earned any reward which it lies in ourpower to bestow."
Sherlock Holmes rose with a smile.
"You are two of the most busy men in the country," said he, "and inmy own small way I have also a good many calls upon me. I regretexceedingly that I cannot help you in this matter, and anycontinuation of this interview would be a waste of time."
The Premier sprang to his feet with that quick, fierce gleam of hisdeep-set eyes before which a Cabinet has cowered. "I am notaccustomed, sir--" he began, but mastered his anger and resumed hisseat. For a minute or more we all sat in silence. Then the oldstatesman shrugged his shoulders.
"We must accept your terms, Mr. Holmes. No doubt you are right, andit is unreasonable for us to expect you to act unless we give you ourentire confidence."
"I agree with you, sir," said the younger statesman.
"Then I will tell you, relying entirely upon your honour and that ofyour colleague, Dr. Watson. I may appeal to your patriotism also, forI could not imagine a greater misfortune for the country than thatthis affair should come out."
"You may safely trust us."
"The letter, then, is from a certain foreign potentate who has beenruffled by some recent Colonial developments of this country. It hasbeen written hurriedly and upon his own responsibility entirely.Inquiries have shown that his Ministers know nothing of the matter.At the same time it is couched in so unfortunate a manner, andcertain phrases in it are of so provocative a character, that itspublication would undoubtedly lead to a most dangerous state offeeling in this country. There would be such a ferment, sir, that Ido not hesitate to say that within a week of the publication of thatletter this country would be involved in a great war."
Holmes wrote a name upon a slip of paper and handed it to thePremier.
"Exactly. It was he. And it is this letter--this letter which maywell mean the expenditure of a thousand millions and the lives of ahundred thousand men--which has become lost in this unaccountablefashion."
"Have you informed the sender?"
"Yes, sir, a cipher telegram has been despatched."
"Perhaps he desires the publication of the letter."
"No, sir, we have strong reason to believe that he alreadyunderstands that he has acted in an indiscreet and hot-headed manner.It would be a greater blow to him and to his country than to us ifthis letter were to come out."
"If this is so, whose interest is it that the letter should come out?Why should anyone desire to steal it or to publish it?"
"There, Mr. Holmes, you take me into regions of high internationalpolitics. But if you consider the European situation you will have nodifficulty in perceiving the motive. The whole of Europe is an armedcamp. There is a double league which makes a fair balance of militarypower. Great Britain holds the scales. If Britain were driven intowar with one confederacy, it would assure the supremacy of the otherconfederacy, whether they joined in the war or not. Do you follow?"
"Very clearly. It is then the interest of the enemies of thispotentate to secure and publish this letter, so as to make a breachbetween his country and ours?"
"Yes, sir."
"And to whom would this document be sent if it fell into the hands ofan enemy?"
"To any of the great Chancelleries of Europe. It is probably speedingon its way thither at the present instant as fast as steam can takeit."
Mr. Trelawney Hope dropped his head on his chest and groaned aloud.The Premier placed his hand kindly upon his shoulder.
"It is your misfortune, my dear fellow. No one can blame you. Thereis no precaution which you have neglected. Now, Mr. Holmes, you arein full possession of the facts. What course do you recommend?"
Holmes shook his head mournfully.
"You think, sir, that unless this document is recovered there will bewar?"
"I think it is very probable."
"Then, sir, prepare for war."
"That is a hard saying, Mr. Holmes."
"Consider the facts, sir. It is inconceivable that it was taken aftereleven-thirty at night, since I understand that Mr. Hope and his wifewere both in the room from that hour until the loss was found out. Itwas taken, then, yesterday evening between seven-thirty andeleven-thirty, probably near the earlier hour, since whoever took itevidently knew that it was there and would naturally secure it asearly as possible. Now, sir, if a document of this importance weretaken at that hour, where can it be now? No one has any reason toretain it. It has been passed rapidly on to those who need it. Whatchance have we now to overtake or even to trace it? It is beyond ourreach."
The Prime Minister rose from the settee.
"What you say is perfectly logical, Mr. Holmes. I feel that thematter is indeed out of our hands."
"Let us presume, for argument's sake, that the document was taken bythe maid or by the valet--"
"They are both old and tried servants."
"I understand you to say that your room is on the second floor, thatthere is no entrance from without, and that from within no one couldgo up unobserved. It must, then, be somebody in the house who hastaken it. To whom would the thief take it? To one of severalinternational spies and secret agents, whose names are tolerablyfamiliar to me. There are three who may be said to be the heads oftheir profession. I will begin my research by going round and findingif each of them is at his post. If one is missing--especially if hehas disappeared since last night--we will have some indication as towhere the document has gone."
"Why should he be missing?" asked the European Secretary. "He wouldtake the letter to an Embassy in London, as likely as not."
"I fancy not. These agents work independently, and their relationswith the Embassies are often strained."
The Prime Minister nodded his acquiescence.
"I believe you are right, Mr. Holmes. He would take so valuable aprize to head-quarters with his own hands. I think that your courseof action is an excellent one. Meanwhile, Hope, we cannot neglect allour other duties on account of this one misfortune. Should there beany fresh developments during the day we shall communicate with you,and you will no doubt let us know the results of your own inquiries."
The two statesmen bowed and walked gravely from the room.
When our illustrious visitors had departed Holmes lit his pipe insilence, and sat for some time lost in the deepest thought. I hadopened the morning paper and was immersed in a sensational crimewhich had occurred in London the night before, when my friend gave anexclamation, sprang to his feet, and laid his pipe down upon themantelpiece.
"Yes," said he, "there is no better way of approaching it. Thesituation is desperate, but not hopeless. Even now, if we could besure which of them has taken it, it is just possible that it has notyet passed out of his hands. After all, it is a question of moneywith these fellows, and I have the British Treasury behind me. Ifit's on the market I'll buy it--if it means another penny on theincome-tax. It is conceivable that the fellow might hold it back tosee what bids come from this side before he tries his luck on theother. There are only those three capable of playing so bold a game;there are Oberstein, La Rothiere, and Eduardo Lucas. I will see eachof them."
I glanced at my morning paper.
"Is that Eduardo Lucas of Godolphin Street?"
"Yes."
"You will not see him."
"Why not?"
"He was murdered in his house last night."
My friend has so often astonished me in the course of our adventuresthat it was with a sense of exultation that I realized how completelyI had astonished him. He stared in amazement, and then snatched thepaper from my hands. This was the paragraph which I had been engagedin reading when he rose from his chair:
                         Murder in WestminsterA crime of mysterious character was committed last night at 16,Godolphin Street, one of the old-fashioned and secluded rows ofeighteenth-century houses which lie between the river and the Abbey,almost in the shadow of the great Tower of the Houses of Parliament.This small but select mansion has been inhabited for some years byMr. Eduardo Lucas, well known in society circles both on account ofhis charming personality and because he has the well-deservedreputation of being one of the best amateur tenors in the country.Mr. Lucas is an unmarried man, thirty-four years of age, and hisestablishment consists of Mrs. Pringle, an elderly housekeeper, andof Mitton, his valet. The former retires early and sleeps at the topof the house. The valet was out for the evening, visiting a friend atHammersmith. From ten o'clock onwards Mr. Lucas had the house tohimself. What occurred during that time has not yet transpired, butat a quarter to twelve Police-constable Barrett, passing alongGodolphin Street, observed that the door of No. 16 was ajar. Heknocked, but received no answer. Perceiving a light in the front roomhe advanced into the passage and again knocked, but without reply. Hethen pushed open the door and entered. The room was in a state ofwild disorder, the furniture being all swept to one side, and onechair lying on its back in the centre. Beside this chair, and stillgrasping one of its legs, lay the unfortunate tenant of the house. Hehad been stabbed to the heart and must have died instantly. The knifewith which the crime had been committed was a curved Indian dagger,plucked down from a trophy of Oriental arms which adorned one of thewalls. Robbery does not appear to have been the motive of the crime,for there had been no attempt to remove the valuable contents of theroom. Mr. Eduardo Lucas was so well known and popular that hisviolent and mysterious fate will arouse painful interest and intensesympathy in a wide-spread circle of friends.
"Well, Watson, what do you make of this?" asked Holmes, after a longpause.
"It is an amazing coincidence."
"A coincidence! Here is one of the three men whom we had named aspossible actors in this drama, and he meets a violent death duringthe very hours when we know that that drama was being enacted. Theodds are enormous against its being coincidence. No figures couldexpress them. No, my dear Watson, the two events are connected--mustbe connected. It is for us to find the connection."
"But now the official police must know all."
"Not at all. They know all they see at Godolphin Street. Theyknow--and shall know--nothing of Whitehall Terrace. Only we know ofboth events, and can trace the relation between them. There is oneobvious point which would, in any case, have turned my suspicionsagainst Lucas. Godolphin Street, Westminster, is only a few minutes'walk from Whitehall Terrace. The other secret agents whom I havenamed live in the extreme West-end. It was easier, therefore, forLucas than for the others to establish a connection or receive amessage from the European Secretary's household--a small thing, andyet where events are compressed into a few hours it may proveessential. Halloa! what have we here?"
Mrs. Hudson had appeared with a lady's card upon her salver. Holmesglanced at it, raised his eyebrows, and handed it over to me.
"Ask Lady Hilda Trelawney Hope if she will be kind enough to stepup," said he.
A moment later our modest apartment, already so distinguished thatmorning, was further honoured by the entrance of the most lovelywoman in London. I had often heard of the beauty of the youngestdaughter of the Duke of Belminster, but no description of it, and nocontemplation of colourless photographs, had prepared me for thesubtle, delicate charm and the beautiful colouring of that exquisitehead. And yet as we saw it that autumn morning, it was not its beautywhich would be the first thing to impress the observer. The cheek waslovely, but it was paled with emotion; the eyes were bright, but itwas the brightness of fever; the sensitive mouth was tight and drawnin an effort after self-command. Terror--not beauty--was what sprangfirst to the eye as our fair visitor stood framed for an instant inthe open door.
"Has my husband been here, Mr. Holmes?"
"Yes, madam, he has been here."
"Mr. Holmes, I implore you not to tell him that I came here." Holmesbowed coldly, and motioned the lady to a chair.
"Your ladyship places me in a very delicate position. I beg that youwill sit down and tell me what you desire; but I fear that I cannotmake any unconditional promise."
She swept across the room and seated herself with her back to thewindow. It was a queenly presence--tall, graceful, and intenselywomanly.
"Mr. Holmes," she said, and her white-gloved hands clasped andunclasped as she spoke--"I will speak frankly to you in the hope thatit may induce you to speak frankly in return. There is completeconfidence between my husband and me on all matters save one. Thatone is politics. On this his lips are sealed. He tells me nothing.Now, I am aware that there was a most deplorable occurrence in ourhouse last night. I know that a paper has disappeared. But becausethe matter is political my husband refuses to take me into hiscomplete confidence. Now it is essential--essential, I say--that Ishould thoroughly understand it. You are the only other person, saveonly these politicians, who knows the true facts. I beg you, then,Mr. Holmes, to tell me exactly what has happened and what it willlead to. Tell me all, Mr. Holmes. Let no regard for your client'sinterests keep you silent, for I assure you that his interests, if hewould only see it, would be best served by taking me into hiscomplete confidence. What was this paper which was stolen?"
"Madam, what you ask me is really impossible."
She groaned and sank her face in her hands.
"You must see that this is so, madam. If your husband thinks fit tokeep you in the dark over this matter, is it for me, who has onlylearned the true facts under the pledge of professional secrecy, totell what he has withheld? It is not fair to ask it. It is him whomyou must ask."
"I have asked him. I come to you as a last resource. But without yourtelling me anything definite, Mr. Holmes, you may do a great serviceif you would enlighten me on one point."
"What is it, madam?"
"Is my husband's political career likely to suffer through thisincident?"
"Well, madam, unless it is set right it may certainly have a veryunfortunate effect."
"Ah!" She drew in her breath sharply as one whose doubts areresolved.
"One more question, Mr. Holmes. From an expression which my husbanddropped in the first shock of this disaster I understood thatterrible public consequences might arise from the loss of thisdocument."
"If he said so, I certainly cannot deny it."
"Of what nature are they?"
"Nay, madam, there again you ask me more than I can possibly answer."
"Then I will take up no more of your time. I cannot blame you, Mr.Holmes, for having refused to speak more freely, and you on your sidewill not, I am sure, think the worse of me because I desire, evenagainst his will, to share my husband's anxieties. Once more I begthat you will say nothing of my visit." She looked back at us fromthe door, and I had a last impression of that beautiful haunted face,the startled eyes, and the drawn mouth. Then she was gone.
"Now, Watson, the fair sex is your department," said Holmes, with asmile, when the dwindling frou-frou of skirts had ended in the slamof the front door. "What was the fair lady's game? What did shereally want?"
"Surely her own statement is clear and her anxiety very natural."
"Hum! Think of her appearance, Watson--her manner, her suppressedexcitement, her restlessness, her tenacity in asking questions.Remember that she comes of a caste who do not lightly show emotion."
"She was certainly much moved."
"Remember also the curious earnestness with which she assured us thatit was best for her husband that she should know all. What did shemean by that? And you must have observed, Watson, how she manoeuvredto have the light at her back. She did not wish us to read herexpression."
"Yes; she chose the one chair in the room."
"And yet the motives of women are so inscrutable. You remember thewoman at Margate whom I suspected for the same reason. No powder onher nose--that proved to be the correct solution. How can you buildon such a quicksand? Their most trivial action may mean volumes, ortheir most extraordinary conduct may depend upon a hairpin or acurling-tongs. Good morning, Watson."
"You are off?"
"Yes; I will wile away the morning at Godolphin Street with ourfriends of the regular establishment. With Eduardo Lucas lies thesolution of our problem, though I must admit that I have not aninkling as to what form it may take. It is a capital mistake totheorize in advance of the facts. Do you stay on guard, my goodWatson, and receive any fresh visitors. I'll join you at lunch if Iam able."
All that day and the next and the next Holmes was in a mood which hisfriends would call taciturn, and others morose. He ran out and ranin, smoked incessantly, played snatches on his violin, sank intoreveries, devoured sandwiches at irregular hours, and hardly answeredthe casual questions which I put to him. It was evident to me thatthings were not going well with him or his quest. He would saynothing of the case, and it was from the papers that I learned theparticulars of the inquest, and the arrest with the subsequentrelease of John Mitton, the valet of the deceased. The coroner's jurybrought in the obvious "Wilful Murder," but the parties remained asunknown as ever. No motive was suggested. The room was full ofarticles of value, but none had been taken. The dead man's papers hadnot been tampered with. They were carefully examined, and showed thathe was a keen student of international politics, an indefatigablegossip, a remarkable linguist, and an untiring letter-writer. He hadbeen on intimate terms with the leading politicians of severalcountries. But nothing sensational was discovered among the documentswhich filled his drawers. As to his relations with women, theyappeared to have been promiscuous but superficial. He had manyacquaintances among them, but few friends, and no one whom he loved.His habits were regular, his conduct inoffensive. His death was anabsolute mystery, and likely to remain so.
As to the arrest of John Mitton, the valet, it was a counsel ofdespair as an alternative to absolute inaction. But no case could besustained against him. He had visited friends in Hammersmith thatnight. The alibi was complete. It is true that he started home at anhour which should have brought him to Westminster before the timewhen the crime was discovered, but his own explanation that he hadwalked part of the way seemed probable enough in view of the finenessof the night. He had actually arrived at twelve o'clock, and appearedto be overwhelmed by the unexpected tragedy. He had always been ongood terms with his master. Several of the dead man'spossessions--notably a small case of razors--had been found in thevalet's boxes, but he explained that they had been presents from thedeceased, and the housekeeper was able to corroborate the story.Mitton had been in Lucas's employment for three years. It wasnoticeable that Lucas did not take Mitton on the Continent with him.Sometimes he visited Paris for three months on end, but Mitton wasleft in charge of the Godolphin Street house. As to the housekeeper,she had heard nothing on the night of the crime. If her master had avisitor he had himself admitted him.
So for three mornings the mystery remained, so far as I could followit in the papers. If Holmes knew more he kept his own counsel, but,as he told me that Inspector Lestrade had taken him into hisconfidence in the case, I knew that he was in close touch with everydevelopment. Upon the fourth day there appeared a long telegram fromParis which seemed to solve the whole question.
A discovery has just been made by the Parisian police [said the DailyTelegraph] which raises the veil which hung round the tragic fate ofMr. Eduardo Lucas, who met his death by violence last Monday night atGodolphin Street, Westminster. Our readers will remember that thedeceased gentleman was found stabbed in his room, and that somesuspicion attached to his valet, but that the case broke down on analibi. Yesterday a lady, who has been known as Mme. Henri Fournaye,occupying a small villa in the Rue Austerlitz, was reported to theauthorities by her servants as being insane. An examination showedthat she had indeed developed mania of a dangerous and permanentform. On inquiry the police have discovered that Mme. Henri Fournayeonly returned from a journey to London on Tuesday last, and there isevidence to connect her with the crime at Westminster. A comparisonof photographs has proved conclusively that M. Henri Fournaye andEduardo Lucas were really one and the same person, and that thedeceased had for some reason lived a double life in London and Paris.Mme. Fournaye, who is of Creole origin, is of an extremely excitablenature, and has suffered in the past from attacks of jealousy whichhave amounted to frenzy. It is conjectured that it was in one ofthese that she committed the terrible crime which has caused such asensation in London. Her movements upon the Monday night have not yetbeen traced, but it is undoubted that a woman answering to herdescription attracted much attention at Charing Cross Station onTuesday morning by the wildness of her appearance and the violence ofher gestures. It is probable, therefore, that the crime was eithercommitted when insane, or that its immediate effect was to drive theunhappy woman out of her mind. At present she is unable to give anycoherent account of the past, and the doctors hold out no hopes ofthe re-establishment of her reason. There is evidence that a woman,who might have been Mme. Fournaye, was seen for some hours on Mondaynight watching the house in Godolphin Street.
"What do you think of that, Holmes?" I had read the account aloud tohim, while he finished his breakfast.
"My dear Watson," said he, as he rose from the table and paced up anddown the room, "you are most long-suffering, but if I have told younothing in the last three days it is because there is nothing totell. Even now this report from Paris does not help us much."
"Surely it is final as regards the man's death."
"The man's death is a mere incident--a trivial episode--in comparisonwith our real task, which is to trace this document and save aEuropean catastrophe. Only one important thing has happened in thelast three days, and that is that nothing has happened. I get reportsalmost hourly from the Government, and it is certain that nowhere inEurope is there any sign of trouble. Now, if this letter wereloose--no, it can't be loose--but if it isn't loose, where can it be?Who has it? Why is it held back? That's the question that beats in mybrain like a hammer. Was it, indeed, a coincidence that Lucas shouldmeet his death on the night when the letter disappeared? Did theletter ever reach him? If so, why is it not among his papers? Didthis mad wife of his carry it off with her? If so, is it in her housein Paris? How could I search for it without the French police havingtheir suspicions aroused? It is a case, my dear Watson, where the lawis as dangerous to us as the criminals are. Every man's hand isagainst us, and yet the interests at stake are colossal. Should Ibring it to a successful conclusion it will certainly represent thecrowning glory of my career. Ah, here is my latest from the front!"He glanced hurriedly at the note which had been handed in. "Halloa!Lestrade seems to have observed something of interest. Put on yourhat, Watson, and we will stroll down together to Westminster."
It was my first visit to the scene of the crime--a high, dingy,narrow-chested house, prim, formal, and solid, like the century whichgave it birth. Lestrade's bulldog features gazed out at us from thefront window, and he greeted us warmly when a big constable hadopened the door and let us in. The room into which we were shown wasthat in which the crime had been committed, but no trace of it nowremained, save an ugly, irregular stain upon the carpet. This carpetwas a small square drugget in the centre of the room, surrounded by abroad expanse of beautiful, old-fashioned wood-flooring in squareblocks highly polished. Over the fireplace was a magnificent trophyof weapons, one of which had been used on that tragic night. In thewindow was a sumptuous writing-desk, and every detail of theapartment, the pictures, the rugs, and the hangings, all pointed to ataste which was luxurious to the verge of effeminacy.
"Seen the Paris news?" asked Lestrade.
Holmes nodded.
"Our French friends seem to have touched the spot this time. No doubtit's just as they say. She knocked at the door--surprise visit, Iguess, for he kept his life in water-tight compartments. He let herin--couldn't keep her in the street. She told him how she had tracedhim, reproached him, one thing led to another, and then with thatdagger so handy the end soon came. It wasn't all done in an instant,though, for these chairs were all swept over yonder, and he had onein his hand as if he had tried to hold her off with it. We've got itall clear as if we had seen it."
Holmes raised his eyebrows.
"And yet you have sent for me?"
"Ah, yes, that's another matter--a mere trifle, but the sort of thingyou take an interest in--queer, you know, and what you might callfreakish. It has nothing to do with the main fact--can't have, on theface of it."
"What is it, then?"
"Well, you know, after a crime of this sort we are very careful tokeep things in their position. Nothing has been moved. Officer incharge here day and night. This morning, as the man was buried andthe investigation over--so far as this room is concerned--we thoughtwe could tidy up a bit. This carpet. You see, it is not fasteneddown; only just laid there. We had occasion to raise it. We found--"
"Yes? You found--"
Holmes's face grew tense with anxiety.
"Well, I'm sure you would never guess in a hundred years what we didfind. You see that stain on the carpet? Well, a great deal must havesoaked through, must it not?"
"Undoubtedly it must."
"Well, you will be surprised to hear that there is no stain on thewhite woodwork to correspond."
"No stain! But there must--"
"Yes; so you would say. But the fact remains that there isn't."
He took the corner of the carpet in his hand and, turning it over, heshowed that it was indeed as he said.
"But the underside is as stained as the upper. It must have left amark."
Lestrade chuckled with delight at having puzzled the famous expert.
"Now I'll show you the explanation. There is a second stain, but itdoes not correspond with the other. See for yourself." As he spoke heturned over another portion of the carpet, and there, sure enough,was a great crimson spill upon the square white facing of theold-fashioned floor. "What do you make of that, Mr. Holmes?"
"Why, it is simple enough. The two stains did correspond, but thecarpet has been turned round. As it was square and unfastened it waseasily done."
"The official police don't need you, Mr. Holmes, to tell them thatthe carpet must have been turned round. That's clear enough, for thestains lie above each other--if you lay it over this way. But what Iwant to know is, who shifted the carpet, and why?"
I could see from Holmes's rigid face that he was vibrating withinward excitement.
"Look here, Lestrade," said he, "has that constable in the passagebeen in charge of the place all the time?"
"Yes, he has."
"Well, take my advice. Examine him carefully. Don't do it before us.We'll wait here. You take him into the back room. You'll be morelikely to get a confession out of him alone. Ask him how he dared toadmit people and leave them alone in this room. Don't ask him if hehas done it. Take it for granted. Tell him you know someone has beenhere. Press him. Tell him that a full confession is his only chanceof forgiveness. Do exactly what I tell you!"
"By George, if he knows I'll have it out of him!" cried Lestrade. Hedarted into the hall, and a few moments later his bullying voicesounded from the back room.
"Now, Watson, now!" cried Holmes, with frenzied eagerness. All thedemoniacal force of the man masked behind that listless manner burstout in a paroxysm of energy. He tore the drugget from the floor, andin an instant was down on his hands and knees clawing at each of thesquares of wood beneath it. One turned sideways as he dug his nailsinto the edge of it. It hinged back like the lid of a box. A smallblack cavity opened beneath it. Holmes plunged his eager hand intoit, and drew it out with a bitter snarl of anger and disappointment.It was empty.
"Quick, Watson, quick! Get it back again!" The wooden lid wasreplaced, and the drugget had only just been drawn straight whenLestrade's voice was heard in the passage. He found Holmes leaninglanguidly against the mantelpiece, resigned and patient, endeavouringto conceal his irrepressible yawns.
"Sorry to keep you waiting, Mr. Holmes. I can see that you are boredto death with the whole affair. Well, he has confessed, all right.Come in here, MacPherson. Let these gentlemen hear of your mostinexcusable conduct."
The big constable, very hot and penitent, sidled into the room.
"I meant no harm, sir, I'm sure. The young woman came to the doorlast evening--mistook the house, she did. And then we got talking.It's lonesome, when you're on duty here all day."
"Well, what happened then?"
"She wanted to see where the crime was done--had read about it in thepapers, she said. She was a very respectable, well-spoken youngwoman, sir, and I saw no harm in letting her have a peep. When shesaw that mark on the carpet, down she dropped on the floor, and layas if she were dead. I ran to the back and got some water, but Icould not bring her to. Then I went round the corner to the Ivy Plantfor some brandy, and by the time I had brought it back the youngwoman had recovered and was off--ashamed of herself, I dare say, anddared not face me."
"How about moving that drugget?"
"Well, sir, it was a bit rumpled, certainly, when I came back. Yousee, she fell on it, and it lies on a polished floor with nothing tokeep it in place. I straightened it out afterwards."
"It's a lesson to you that you can't deceive me, ConstableMacPherson," said Lestrade, with dignity. "No doubt you thought thatyour breach of duty could never be discovered, and yet a mere glanceat that drugget was enough to convince me that someone had beenadmitted to the room. It's lucky for you, my man, that nothing ismissing, or you would find yourself in Queer Street. I'm sorry tohave called you down over such a petty business, Mr. Holmes, but Ithought the point of the second stain not corresponding with thefirst would interest you."
"Certainly, it was most interesting. Has this woman only been hereonce, constable?"
"Yes, sir, only once."
"Who was she?"
"Don't know the name, sir. Was answering an advertisement abouttype-writing, and came to the wrong number--very pleasant, genteelyoung woman, sir."
"Tall? Handsome?"
"Yes, sir; she was a well-grown young woman. I suppose you might sayshe was handsome. Perhaps some would say she was very handsome. 'Oh,officer, do let me have a peep!' says she. She had pretty, coaxingways, as you might say, and I thought there was no harm in lettingher just put her head through the door."
"How was she dressed?"
"Quiet, sir--a long mantle down to her feet."
"What time was it?"
"It was just growing dusk at the time. They were lighting the lampsas I came back with the brandy."
"Very good," said Holmes. "Come, Watson, I think that we have moreimportant work elsewhere."
As we left the house Lestrade remained in the front room, while therepentant constable opened the door to let us out. Holmes turned onthe step and held up something in his hand. The constable staredintently.
"Good Lord, sir!" he cried, with amazement on his face. Holmes puthis finger on his lips, replaced his hand in his breast-pocket, andburst out laughing as we turned down the street. "Excellent!" saidhe. "Come, friend Watson, the curtain rings up for the last act. Youwill be relieved to hear that there will be no war, that the RightHonourable Trelawney Hope will suffer no set-back in his brilliantcareer, that the indiscreet Sovereign will receive no punishment forhis indiscretion, that the Prime Minister will have no Europeancomplication to deal with, and that with a little tact and managementupon our part nobody will be a penny the worse for what might havebeen a very ugly incident."
My mind filled with admiration for this extraordinary man.
"You have solved it!" I cried.
"Hardly that, Watson. There are some points which are as dark asever. But we have so much that it will be our own fault if we cannotget the rest. We will go straight to Whitehall Terrace and bring thematter to a head."
When we arrived at the residence of the European Secretary it was forLady Hilda Trelawney Hope that Sherlock Holmes inquired. We wereshown into the morning-room.
"Mr. Holmes!" said the lady, and her face was pink with herindignation, "this is surely most unfair and ungenerous upon yourpart. I desired, as I have explained, to keep my visit to you asecret, lest my husband should think that I was intruding into hisaffairs. And yet you compromise me by coming here and so showing thatthere are business relations between us."
"Unfortunately, madam, I had no possible alternative. I have beencommissioned to recover this immensely important paper. I musttherefore ask you, madam, to be kind enough to place it in my hands."
The lady sprang to her feet, with the colour all dashed in an instantfrom her beautiful face. Her eyes glazed--she tottered--I thoughtthat she would faint. Then with a grand effort she rallied from theshock, and a supreme astonishment and indignation chased every otherexpression from her features.
"You--you insult me, Mr. Holmes."
"Come, come, madam, it is useless. Give up the letter."
She darted to the bell.
"The butler shall show you out."
"Do not ring, Lady Hilda. If you do, then all my earnest efforts toavoid a scandal will be frustrated. Give up the letter and all willbe set right. If you will work with me I can arrange everything. Ifyou work against me I must expose you."
She stood grandly defiant, a queenly figure, her eyes fixed upon hisas if she would read his very soul. Her hand was on the bell, but shehad forborne to ring it.
"You are trying to frighten me. It is not a very manly thing, Mr.Holmes, to come here and browbeat a woman. You say that you knowsomething. What is it that you know?"
"Pray sit down, madam. You will hurt yourself there if you fall. Iwill not speak until you sit down. Thank you."
"I give you five minutes, Mr. Holmes."
"One is enough, Lady Hilda. I know of your visit to Eduardo Lucas, ofyour giving him this document, of your ingenious return to the roomlast night, and of the manner in which you took the letter from thehiding-place under the carpet."
She stared at him with an ashen face and gulped twice before shecould speak.
"You are mad, Mr. Holmes--you are mad!" she cried, at last.
He drew a small piece of cardboard from his pocket. It was the faceof a woman cut out of a portrait.
"I have carried this because I thought it might be useful," said he."The policeman has recognised it."
She gave a gasp and her head dropped back in the chair.
"Come, Lady Hilda. You have the letter. The matter may still beadjusted. I have no desire to bring trouble to you. My duty ends whenI have returned the lost letter to your husband. Take my advice andbe frank with me; it is your only chance."
Her courage was admirable. Even now she would not own defeat.
"I tell you again, Mr. Holmes, that you are under some absurdillusion."
Holmes rose from his chair.
"I am sorry for you, Lady Hilda. I have done my best for you; I cansee that it is all in vain."
He rang the bell. The butler entered.
"Is Mr. Trelawney Hope at home?"
"He will be home, sir, at a quarter to one."
Holmes glanced at his watch.
"Still a quarter of an hour," said he. "Very good, I shall wait."
The butler had hardly closed the door behind him when Lady Hilda wasdown on her knees at Holmes's feet, her hands out-stretched, herbeautiful face upturned and wet with her tears.
"Oh, spare me, Mr. Holmes! Spare me!" she pleaded, in a frenzy ofsupplication. "For Heaven's sake, don't tell him! I love him so! Iwould not bring one shadow on his life, and this I know would breakhis noble heart."
Holmes raised the lady. "I am thankful, madam, that you have come toyour senses even at this last moment! There is not an instant tolose. Where is the letter?"
She darted across to a writing-desk, unlocked it, and drew out a longblue envelope.
"Here it is, Mr. Holmes. Would to Heaven I had never seen it!"
"How can we return it?" Holmes muttered. "Quick, quick, we must thinkof some way! Where is the despatch-box?"
"Still in his bedroom."
"What a stroke of luck! Quick, madam, bring it here!" 
A moment later she had appeared with a red flat box in her hand.
"How did you open it before? You have a duplicate key? Yes, of courseyou have. Open it!"
From out of her bosom Lady Hilda had drawn a small key. The box flewopen. It was stuffed with papers. Holmes thrust the blue envelopedeep down into the heart of them, between the leaves of some otherdocument. The box was shut, locked, and returned to the bedroom.
"Now we are ready for him," said Holmes; "we have still ten minutes.I am going far to screen you, Lady Hilda. In return you will spendthe time in telling me frankly the real meaning of this extraordinaryaffair."
"Mr. Holmes, I will tell you everything," cried the lady. "Oh, Mr.Holmes, I would cut off my right hand before I gave him a moment ofsorrow! There is no woman in all London who loves her husband as Ido, and yet if he knew how I have acted--how I have been compelled toact--he would never forgive me. For his own honour stands so highthat he could not forget or pardon a lapse in another. Help me, Mr.Holmes! My happiness, his happiness, our very lives are at stake!"
"Quick, madam, the time grows short!"
"It was a letter of mine, Mr. Holmes, an indiscreet letter writtenbefore my marriage--a foolish letter, a letter of an impulsive,loving girl. I meant no harm, and yet he would have thought itcriminal. Had he read that letter his confidence would have been forever destroyed. It is years since I wrote it. I had thought that thewhole matter was forgotten. Then at last I heard from this man,Lucas, that it had passed into his hands, and that he would lay itbefore my husband. I implored his mercy. He said that he would returnmy letter if I would bring him a certain document which he describedin my husband's despatch-box. He had some spy in the office who hadtold him of its existence. He assured me that no harm could come tomy husband. Put yourself in my position, Mr. Holmes! What was I todo?"
"Take your husband into your confidence."
"I could not, Mr. Holmes, I could not! On the one side seemed certainruin; on the other, terrible as it seemed to take my husband's paper,still in a matter of politics I could not understand theconsequences, while in a matter of love and trust they were only tooclear to me. I did it, Mr. Holmes! I took an impression of his key;this man Lucas furnished a duplicate. I opened his despatch-box, tookthe paper, and conveyed it to Godolphin Street."
"What happened there, madam?"
"I tapped at the door as agreed. Lucas opened it. I followed him intohis room, leaving the hall door ajar behind me, for I feared to bealone with the man. I remember that there was a woman outside as Ientered. Our business was soon done. He had my letter on his desk; Ihanded him the document. He gave me the letter. At this instant therewas a sound at the door. There were steps in the passage. Lucasquickly turned back the drugget, thrust the document into somehiding-place there, and covered it over.
"What happened after that is like some fearful dream. I have a visionof a dark, frantic face, of a woman's voice, which screamed inFrench, 'My waiting is not in vain. At last, at last I have found youwith her!' There was a savage struggle. I saw him with a chair in hishand, a knife gleamed in hers. I rushed from the horrible scene, ranfrom the house, and only next morning in the paper did I learn thedreadful result. That night I was happy, for I had my letter, and Ihad not seen yet what the future would bring.
"It was the next morning that I realized that I had only exchangedone trouble for another. My husband's anguish at the loss of hispaper went to my heart. I could hardly prevent myself from there andthen kneeling down at his feet and telling him what I had done. Butthat again would mean a confession of the past. I came to you thatmorning in order to understand the full enormity of my offence. Fromthe instant that I grasped it my whole mind was turned to the onethought of getting back my husband's paper. It must still be whereLucas had placed it, for it was concealed before this dreadful womanentered the room. If it had not been for her coming, I should nothave known where his hiding-place was. How was I to get into theroom? For two days I watched the place, but the door was never leftopen. Last night I made a last attempt. What I did and how Isucceeded, you have already learned. I brought the paper back withme, and thought of destroying it since I could see no way ofreturning it, without confessing my guilt to my husband. Heavens, Ihear his step upon the stair!"
The European Secretary burst excitedly into the room.
"Any news, Mr. Holmes, any news?" he cried.
"I have some hopes."
"Ah, thank heaven!" His face became radiant. "The Prime Minister islunching with me. May he share your hopes? He has nerves of steel,and yet I know that he has hardly slept since this terrible event.Jacobs, will you ask the Prime Minister to come up? As to you, dear,I fear that this is a matter of politics. We will join you in a fewminutes in the dining-room."
The Prime Minister's manner was subdued, but I could see by the gleamof his eyes and the twitchings of his bony hands that he shared theexcitement of his young colleague.
"I understand that you have something to report, Mr. Holmes?"
"Purely negative as yet," my friend answered. "I have inquired atevery point where it might be, and I am sure that there is no dangerto be apprehended."
"But that is not enough, Mr. Holmes. We cannot live for ever on sucha volcano. We must have something definite."
"I am in hopes of getting it. That is why I am here. The more I thinkof the matter the more convinced I am that the letter has never leftthis house."
"Mr. Holmes!"
"If it had it would certainly have been public by now."
"But why should anyone take it in order to keep it in his house?"
"I am not convinced that anyone did take it."
"Then how could it leave the despatch-box?"
"I am not convinced that it ever did leave the despatch-box."
"Mr. Holmes, this joking is very ill-timed. You have my assurancethat it left the box."
"Have you examined the box since Tuesday morning?"
"No; it was not necessary."
"You may conceivably have overlooked it."
"Impossible, I say."
"But I am not convinced of it; I have known such things to happen. Ipresume there are other papers there. Well, it may have got mixedwith them."
"It was on the top."
"Someone may have shaken the box and displaced it."
"No, no; I had everything out."
"Surely it is easily decided, Hope," said the Premier. "Let us havethe despatch-box brought in."
The Secretary rang the bell.
"Jacobs, bring down my despatch-box. This is a farcical waste oftime, but still, if nothing else will satisfy you, it shall be done.Thank you, Jacobs; put it here. I have always had the key on mywatch-chain. Here are the papers, you see. Letter from Lord Merrow,report from Sir Charles Hardy, memorandum from Belgrade, note on theRusso-German grain taxes, letter from Madrid, note from LordFlowers--good heavens! what is this? Lord Bellinger! Lord Bellinger!"
The Premier snatched the blue envelope from his hand.
"Yes, it is it--and the letter is intact. Hope, I congratulate you."
"Thank you! Thank you! What a weight from my heart. But this isinconceivable--impossible. Mr. Holmes, you are a wizard, a sorcerer!How did you know it was there?"
"Because I knew it was nowhere else."
"I cannot believe my eyes!" He ran wildly to the door. "Where is mywife? I must tell her that all is well. Hilda! Hilda!" we heard hisvoice on the stairs.
The Premier looked at Holmes with twinkling eyes.
"Come, sir," said he. "There is more in this than meets the eye. Howcame the letter back in the box?"
Holmes turned away smiling from the keen scrutiny of those wonderfuleyes.
"We also have our diplomatic secrets," said he, and picking up hishat he turned to the door.





                     THE HOUND OF THE BASKERVILLES




                           Table of contents   Mr. Sherlock Holmes   The Curse of the Baskervilles   The Problem   Sir Henry Baskerville   Three Broken Threads   Baskerville Hall   The Stapletons of Merripit House   First Report of Dr. Watson   Second Report of Dr. Watson   Extract from the Diary of Dr. Watson   The Man on the Tor   Death on the Moor   Fixing the Nets   The Hound of the Baskervilles   A Retrospection














     CHAPTER I     Mr. Sherlock Holmes

Mr. Sherlock Holmes, who was usually very late in the mornings, saveupon those not infrequent occasions when he was up all night, wasseated at the breakfast table. I stood upon the hearth-rug and pickedup the stick which our visitor had left behind him the night before.It was a fine, thick piece of wood, bulbous-headed, of the sort whichis known as a "Penang lawyer." Just under the head was a broad silverband nearly an inch across. "To James Mortimer, M.R.C.S., from hisfriends of the C.C.H.," was engraved upon it, with the date "1884."It was just such a stick as the old-fashioned family practitionerused to carry--dignified, solid, and reassuring.
"Well, Watson, what do you make of it?"
Holmes was sitting with his back to me, and I had given him no signof my occupation.
"How did you know what I was doing? I believe you have eyes in theback of your head."
"I have, at least, a well-polished, silver-plated coffee-pot in frontof me," said he. "But, tell me, Watson, what do you make of ourvisitor's stick? Since we have been so unfortunate as to miss him andhave no notion of his errand, this accidental souvenir becomes ofimportance. Let me hear you reconstruct the man by an examination ofit."
"I think," said I, following as far as I could the methods of mycompanion, "that Dr. Mortimer is a successful, elderly medical man,well-esteemed since those who know him give him this mark of theirappreciation."
"Good!" said Holmes. "Excellent!"
"I think also that the probability is in favour of his being acountry practitioner who does a great deal of his visiting on foot."
"Why so?"
"Because this stick, though originally a very handsome one has beenso knocked about that I can hardly imagine a town practitionercarrying it. The thick-iron ferrule is worn down, so it is evidentthat he has done a great amount of walking with it."
"Perfectly sound!" said Holmes.
"And then again, there is the 'friends of the C.C.H.' I should guessthat to be the Something Hunt, the local hunt to whose members he haspossibly given some surgical assistance, and which has made him asmall presentation in return."
"Really, Watson, you excel yourself," said Holmes, pushing back hischair and lighting a cigarette. "I am bound to say that in all theaccounts which you have been so good as to give of my own smallachievements you have habitually underrated your own abilities. Itmay be that you are not yourself luminous, but you are a conductor oflight. Some people without possessing genius have a remarkable powerof stimulating it. I confess, my dear fellow, that I am very much inyour debt."
He had never said as much before, and I must admit that his wordsgave me keen pleasure, for I had often been piqued by hisindifference to my admiration and to the attempts which I had made togive publicity to his methods. I was proud, too, to think that I hadso far mastered his system as to apply it in a way which earned hisapproval. He now took the stick from my hands and examined it for afew minutes with his naked eyes. Then with an expression of interesthe laid down his cigarette, and carrying the cane to the window, helooked over it again with a convex lens.
"Interesting, though elementary," said he as he returned to hisfavourite corner of the settee. "There are certainly one or twoindications upon the stick. It gives us the basis for severaldeductions."
"Has anything escaped me?" I asked with some self-importance. "Itrust that there is nothing of consequence which I have overlooked?"
"I am afraid, my dear Watson, that most of your conclusions wereerroneous. When I said that you stimulated me I meant, to be frank,that in noting your fallacies I was occasionally guided towards thetruth. Not that you are entirely wrong in this instance. The man iscertainly a country practitioner. And he walks a good deal."
"Then I was right."
"To that extent."
"But that was all."
"No, no, my dear Watson, not all--by no means all. I would suggest,for example, that a presentation to a doctor is more likely to comefrom a hospital than from a hunt, and that when the initials 'C.C.'are placed before that hospital the words 'Charing Cross' verynaturally suggest themselves."
"You may be right."
"The probability lies in that direction. And if we take this as aworking hypothesis we have a fresh basis from which to start ourconstruction of this unknown visitor."
"Well, then, supposing that 'C.C.H.' does stand for 'Charing CrossHospital,' what further inferences may we draw?"
"Do none suggest themselves? You know my methods. Apply them!"
"I can only think of the obvious conclusion that the man haspractised in town before going to the country."
"I think that we might venture a little farther than this. Look at itin this light. On what occasion would it be most probable that such apresentation would be made? When would his friends unite to give hima pledge of their good will? Obviously at the moment when Dr.Mortimer withdrew from the service of the hospital in order to startin practice for himself. We know there has been a presentation. Webelieve there has been a change from a town hospital to a countrypractice. Is it, then, stretching our inference too far to say thatthe presentation was on the occasion of the change?"
"It certainly seems probable."
"Now, you will observe that he could not have been on the staff ofthe hospital, since only a man well-established in a London practicecould hold such a position, and such a one would not drift into thecountry. What was he, then? If he was in the hospital and yet not onthe staff he could only have been a house-surgeon or ahouse-physician--little more than a senior student. And he left fiveyears ago--the date is on the stick. So your grave, middle-agedfamily practitioner vanishes into thin air, my dear Watson, and thereemerges a young fellow under thirty, amiable, unambitious,absent-minded, and the possessor of a favourite dog, which I shoulddescribe roughly as being larger than a terrier and smaller than amastiff."
I laughed incredulously as Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his setteeand blew little wavering rings of smoke up to the ceiling.
"As to the latter part, I have no means of checking you," said I,"but at least it is not difficult to find out a few particulars aboutthe man's age and professional career." From my small medical shelf Itook down the Medical Directory and turned up the name. There wereseveral Mortimers, but only one who could be our visitor. I read hisrecord aloud.
"Mortimer, James, M.R.C.S., 1882, Grimpen, Dartmoor, Devon.House-surgeon, from 1882 to 1884, at Charing Cross Hospital. Winnerof the Jackson prize for Comparative Pathology, with essay entitled'Is Disease a Reversion?' Corresponding member of the SwedishPathological Society. Author of 'Some Freaks of Atavism' (Lancet1882). 'Do We Progress?' (Journal of Psychology, March, 1883).Medical Officer for the parishes of Grimpen, Thorsley, and HighBarrow."
"No mention of that local hunt, Watson," said Holmes with amischievous smile, "but a country doctor, as you very astutelyobserved. I think that I am fairly justified in my inferences. As tothe adjectives, I said, if I remember right, amiable, unambitious,and absent-minded. It is my experience that it is only an amiable manin this world who receives testimonials, only an unambitious one whoabandons a London career for the country, and only an absent-mindedone who leaves his stick and not his visiting-card after waiting anhour in your room."
"And the dog?"
"Has been in the habit of carrying this stick behind his master.Being a heavy stick the dog has held it tightly by the middle, andthe marks of his teeth are very plainly visible. The dog's jaw, asshown in the space between these marks, is too broad in my opinionfor a terrier and not broad enough for a mastiff. It may havebeen--yes, by Jove, it is a curly-haired spaniel."
He had risen and paced the room as he spoke. Now he halted in therecess of the window. There was such a ring of conviction in hisvoice that I glanced up in surprise.
"My dear fellow, how can you possibly be so sure of that?"
"For the very simple reason that I see the dog himself on our verydoor-step, and there is the ring of its owner. Don't move, I beg you,Watson. He is a professional brother of yours, and your presence maybe of assistance to me. Now is the dramatic moment of fate, Watson,when you hear a step upon the stair which is walking into your life,and you know not whether for good or ill. What does Dr. JamesMortimer, the man of science, ask of Sherlock Holmes, the specialistin crime? Come in!"
The appearance of our visitor was a surprise to me, since I hadexpected a typical country practitioner. He was a very tall, thinman, with a long nose like a beak, which jutted out between two keen,gray eyes, set closely together and sparkling brightly from behind apair of gold-rimmed glasses. He was clad in a professional but ratherslovenly fashion, for his frock-coat was dingy and his trousersfrayed. Though young, his long back was already bowed, and he walkedwith a forward thrust of his head and a general air of peeringbenevolence. As he entered his eyes fell upon the stick in Holmes'shand, and he ran towards it with an exclamation of joy. "I am so veryglad," said he. "I was not sure whether I had left it here or in theShipping Office. I would not lose that stick for the world."
"A presentation, I see," said Holmes.
"Yes, sir."
"From Charing Cross Hospital?"
"From one or two friends there on the occasion of my marriage."
"Dear, dear, that's bad!" said Holmes, shaking his head.
Dr. Mortimer blinked through his glasses in mild astonishment.
"Why was it bad?"
"Only that you have disarranged our little deductions. Your marriage,you say?"
"Yes, sir. I married, and so left the hospital, and with it all hopesof a consulting practice. It was necessary to make a home of my own."
"Come, come, we are not so far wrong, after all," said Holmes. "Andnow, Dr. James Mortimer--"
"Mister, sir, Mister--a humble M.R.C.S."
"And a man of precise mind, evidently."
"A dabbler in science, Mr. Holmes, a picker up of shells on theshores of the great unknown ocean. I presume that it is Mr. SherlockHolmes whom I am addressing and not--"
"No, this is my friend Dr. Watson."
"Glad to meet you, sir. I have heard your name mentioned inconnection with that of your friend. You interest me very much, Mr.Holmes. I had hardly expected so dolichocephalic a skull or suchwell-marked supra-orbital development. Would you have any objectionto my running my finger along your parietal fissure? A cast of yourskull, sir, until the original is available, would be an ornament toany anthropological museum. It is not my intention to be fulsome, butI confess that I covet your skull."
Sherlock Holmes waved our strange visitor into a chair. "You are anenthusiast in your line of thought, I perceive, sir, as I am inmine," said he. "I observe from your forefinger that you make yourown cigarettes. Have no hesitation in lighting one."
The man drew out paper and tobacco and twirled the one up in theother with surprising dexterity. He had long, quivering fingers asagile and restless as the antennae of an insect.
Holmes was silent, but his little darting glances showed me theinterest which he took in our curious companion.
"I presume, sir," said he at last, "that it was not merely for thepurpose of examining my skull that you have done me the honour tocall here last night and again to-day?"
"No, sir, no; though I am happy to have had the opportunity of doingthat as well. I came to you, Mr. Holmes, because I recognized that Iam myself an unpractical man and because I am suddenly confrontedwith a most serious and extraordinary problem. Recognizing, as I do,that you are the second highest expert in Europe--"
"Indeed, sir! May I inquire who has the honour to be the first?"asked Holmes with some asperity.
"To the man of precisely scientific mind the work of MonsieurBertillon must always appeal strongly."
"Then had you not better consult him?"
"I said, sir, to the precisely scientific mind. But as a practicalman of affairs it is acknowledged that you stand alone. I trust, sir,that I have not inadvertently--"
"Just a little," said Holmes. "I think, Dr. Mortimer, you would dowisely if without more ado you would kindly tell me plainly what theexact nature of the problem is in which you demand my assistance."




     CHAPTER II     The Curse of the Baskervilles

"I have in my pocket a manuscript," said Dr. James Mortimer.
"I observed it as you entered the room," said Holmes.
"It is an old manuscript."
"Early eighteenth century, unless it is a forgery."
"How can you say that, sir?"
"You have presented an inch or two of it to my examination all thetime that you have been talking. It would be a poor expert who couldnot give the date of a document within a decade or so. You maypossibly have read my little monograph upon the subject. I put thatat 1730."
"The exact date is 1742." Dr. Mortimer drew it from hisbreast-pocket. "This family paper was committed to my care by SirCharles Baskerville, whose sudden and tragic death some three monthsago created so much excitement in Devonshire. I may say that I washis personal friend as well as his medical attendant. He was astrong-minded man, sir, shrewd, practical, and as unimaginative as Iam myself. Yet he took this document very seriously, and his mind wasprepared for just such an end as did eventually overtake him."
Holmes stretched out his hand for the manuscript and flattened itupon his knee.
"You will observe, Watson, the alternative use of the long s and theshort. It is one of several indications which enabled me to fix thedate."
I looked over his shoulder at the yellow paper and the faded script.At the head was written: "Baskerville Hall," and below in large,scrawling figures: "1742."
"It appears to be a statement of some sort."
"Yes, it is a statement of a certain legend which runs in theBaskerville family."
"But I understand that it is something more modern and practical uponwhich you wish to consult me?"
"Most modern. A most practical, pressing matter, which must bedecided within twenty-four hours. But the manuscript is short and isintimately connected with the affair. With your permission I willread it to you."
Holmes leaned back in his chair, placed his finger-tips together, andclosed his eyes, with an air of resignation. Dr. Mortimer turned themanuscript to the light and read in a high, cracking voice thefollowing curious, old-world narrative:--
"Of the origin of the Hound of the Baskervilles there have been manystatements, yet as I come in a direct line from Hugo Baskerville, andas I had the story from my father, who also had it from his, I haveset it down with all belief that it occurred even as is here setforth. And I would have you believe, my sons, that the same Justicewhich punishes sin may also most graciously forgive it, and that noban is so heavy but that by prayer and repentance it may be removed.Learn then from this story not to fear the fruits of the past, butrather to be circumspect in the future, that those foul passionswhereby our family has suffered so grievously may not again be loosedto our undoing.
"Know then that in the time of the Great Rebellion (the history ofwhich by the learned Lord Clarendon I most earnestly commend to yourattention) this Manor of Baskerville was held by Hugo of that name,nor can it be gainsaid that he was a most wild, profane, and godlessman. This, in truth, his neighbours might have pardoned, seeing thatsaints have never flourished in those parts, but there was in him acertain wanton and cruel humour which made his name a byword throughthe West. It chanced that this Hugo came to love (if, indeed, so darka passion may be known under so bright a name) the daughter of ayeoman who held lands near the Baskerville estate. But the youngmaiden, being discreet and of good repute, would ever avoid him, forshe feared his evil name. So it came to pass that one Michaelmas thisHugo, with five or six of his idle and wicked companions, stole downupon the farm and carried off the maiden, her father and brothersbeing from home, as he well knew. When they had brought her to theHall the maiden was placed in an upper chamber, while Hugo and hisfriends sat down to a long carouse, as was their nightly custom. Now,the poor lass upstairs was like to have her wits turned at thesinging and shouting and terrible oaths which came up to her frombelow, for they say that the words used by Hugo Baskerville, when hewas in wine, were such as might blast the man who said them. At lastin the stress of her fear she did that which might have daunted thebravest or most active man, for by the aid of the growth of ivy whichcovered (and still covers) the south wall she came down from underthe eaves, and so homeward across the moor, there being three leaguesbetwixt the Hall and her father's farm.
"It chanced that some little time later Hugo left his guests to carryfood and drink--with other worse things, perchance--to his captive,and so found the cage empty and the bird escaped. Then, as it wouldseem, he became as one that hath a devil, for, rushing down thestairs into the dining-hall, he sprang upon the great table, flagonsand trenchers flying before him, and he cried aloud before all thecompany that he would that very night render his body and soul to thePowers of Evil if he might but overtake the wench. And while therevellers stood aghast at the fury of the man, one more wicked or, itmay be, more drunken than the rest, cried out that they should putthe hounds upon her. Whereat Hugo ran from the house, crying to hisgrooms that they should saddle his mare and unkennel the pack, andgiving the hounds a kerchief of the maid's, he swung them to theline, and so off full cry in the moonlight over the moor.
"Now, for some space the revellers stood agape, unable to understandall that had been done in such haste. But anon their bemused witsawoke to the nature of the deed which was like to be done upon themoorlands. Everything was now in an uproar, some calling for theirpistols, some for their horses, and some for another flask of wine.But at length some sense came back to their crazed minds, and thewhole of them, thirteen in number, took horse and started in pursuit.The moon shone clear above them, and they rode swiftly abreast,taking that course which the maid must needs have taken if she wereto reach her own home.
"They had gone a mile or two when they passed one of the nightshepherds upon the moorlands, and they cried to him to know if he hadseen the hunt. And the man, as the story goes, was so crazed withfear that he could scarce speak, but at last he said that he hadindeed seen the unhappy maiden, with the hounds upon her track. 'ButI have seen more than that,' said he, 'for Hugo Baskerville passed meupon his black mare, and there ran mute behind him such a hound ofhell as God forbid should ever be at my heels.' So the drunkensquires cursed the shepherd and rode onward. But soon their skinsturned cold, for there came a galloping across the moor, and theblack mare, dabbled with white froth, went past with trailing bridleand empty saddle. Then the revellers rode close together, for a greatfear was on them, but they still followed over the moor, though each,had he been alone, would have been right glad to have turned hishorse's head. Riding slowly in this fashion they came at last uponthe hounds. These, though known for their valour and their breed,were whimpering in a cluster at the head of a deep dip or goyal, aswe call it, upon the moor, some slinking away and some, with startinghackles and staring eyes, gazing down the narrow valley before them.
"The company had come to a halt, more sober men, as you may guess,than when they started. The most of them would by no means advance,but three of them, the boldest, or it may be the most drunken, rodeforward down the goyal. Now, it opened into a broad space in whichstood two of those great stones, still to be seen there, which wereset by certain forgotten peoples in the days of old. The moon wasshining bright upon the clearing, and there in the centre lay theunhappy maid where she had fallen, dead of fear and of fatigue. Butit was not the sight of her body, nor yet was it that of the body ofHugo Baskerville lying near her, which raised the hair upon the headsof these three daredevil roysterers, but it was that, standing overHugo, and plucking at his throat, there stood a foul thing, a great,black beast, shaped like a hound, yet larger than any hound that evermortal eye has rested upon. And even as they looked the thing torethe throat out of Hugo Baskerville, on which, as it turned itsblazing eyes and dripping jaws upon them, the three shrieked withfear and rode for dear life, still screaming, across the moor. One,it is said, died that very night of what he had seen, and the othertwain were but broken men for the rest of their days.
"Such is the tale, my sons, of the coming of the hound which is saidto have plagued the family so sorely ever since. If I have set itdown it is because that which is clearly known hath less terror thanthat which is but hinted at and guessed. Nor can it be denied thatmany of the family have been unhappy in their deaths, which have beensudden, bloody, and mysterious. Yet may we shelter ourselves in theinfinite goodness of Providence, which would not forever punish theinnocent beyond that third or fourth generation which is threatenedin Holy Writ. To that Providence, my sons, I hereby commend you, andI counsel you by way of caution to forbear from crossing the moor inthose dark hours when the powers of evil are exalted.
"[This from Hugo Baskerville to his sons Rodger and John, withinstructions that they say nothing thereof to their sisterElizabeth.]"
When Dr. Mortimer had finished reading this singular narrative hepushed his spectacles up on his forehead and stared across at Mr.Sherlock Holmes. The latter yawned and tossed the end of hiscigarette into the fire.
"Well?" said he.
"Do you not find it interesting?"
"To a collector of fairy tales."
Dr. Mortimer drew a folded newspaper out of his pocket.
"Now, Mr. Holmes, we will give you something a little more recent.This is the Devon County Chronicle of May 14th of this year. It is ashort account of the facts elicited at the death of Sir CharlesBaskerville which occurred a few days before that date."
My friend leaned a little forward and his expression became intent.Our visitor readjusted his glasses and began:--
"The recent sudden death of Sir Charles Baskerville, whose name hasbeen mentioned as the probable Liberal candidate for Mid-Devon at thenext election, has cast a gloom over the county. Though Sir Charleshad resided at Baskerville Hall for a comparatively short period hisamiability of character and extreme generosity had won the affectionand respect of all who had been brought into contact with him. Inthese days of nouveaux riches it is refreshing to find a case wherethe scion of an old county family which has fallen upon evil days isable to make his own fortune and to bring it back with him to restorethe fallen grandeur of his line. Sir Charles, as is well known, madelarge sums of money in South African speculation. More wise thanthose who go on until the wheel turns against them, he realized hisgains and returned to England with them. It is only two years sincehe took up his residence at Baskerville Hall, and it is common talkhow large were those schemes of reconstruction and improvement whichhave been interrupted by his death. Being himself childless, it washis openly expressed desire that the whole country-side should,within his own lifetime, profit by his good fortune, and many willhave personal reasons for bewailing his untimely end. His generousdonations to local and county charities have been frequentlychronicled in these columns.
"The circumstances connected with the death of Sir Charles cannot besaid to have been entirely cleared up by the inquest, but at leastenough has been done to dispose of those rumours to which localsuperstition has given rise. There is no reason whatever to suspectfoul play, or to imagine that death could be from any but naturalcauses. Sir Charles was a widower, and a man who may be said to havebeen in some ways of an eccentric habit of mind. In spite of hisconsiderable wealth he was simple in his personal tastes, and hisindoor servants at Baskerville Hall consisted of a married couplenamed Barrymore, the husband acting as butler and the wife ashousekeeper. Their evidence, corroborated by that of several friends,tends to show that Sir Charles's health has for some time beenimpaired, and points especially to some affection of the heart,manifesting itself in changes of colour, breathlessness, and acuteattacks of nervous depression. Dr. James Mortimer, the friend andmedical attendant of the deceased, has given evidence to the sameeffect.
"The facts of the case are simple. Sir Charles Baskerville was in thehabit every night before going to bed of walking down the famous YewAlley of Baskerville Hall. The evidence of the Barrymores shows thatthis had been his custom. On the 4th of May Sir Charles had declaredhis intention of starting next day for London, and had orderedBarrymore to prepare his luggage. That night he went out as usual forhis nocturnal walk, in the course of which he was in the habit ofsmoking a cigar. He never returned. At twelve o'clock Barrymore,finding the hall door still open, became alarmed, and, lighting alantern, went in search of his master. The day had been wet, and SirCharles's footmarks were easily traced down the Alley. Half-way downthis walk there is a gate which leads out on to the moor. There wereindications that Sir Charles had stood for some little time here. Hethen proceeded down the Alley, and it was at the far end of it thathis body was discovered. One fact which has not been explained is thestatement of Barrymore that his master's footprints altered theircharacter from the time that he passed the moor-gate, and that heappeared from thence onward to have been walking upon his toes. OneMurphy, a gipsy horse-dealer, was on the moor at no great distance atthe time, but he appears by his own confession to have been the worsefor drink. He declares that he heard cries, but is unable to statefrom what direction they came. No signs of violence were to bediscovered upon Sir Charles's person, and though the doctor'sevidence pointed to an almost incredible facial distortion--so greatthat Dr. Mortimer refused at first to believe that it was indeed hisfriend and patient who lay before him--it was explained that that isa symptom which is not unusual in cases of dyspnoea and death fromcardiac exhaustion. This explanation was borne out by the post-mortemexamination, which showed long-standing organic disease, and thecoroner's jury returned a verdict in accordance with the medicalevidence. It is well that this is so, for it is obviously of theutmost importance that Sir Charles's heir should settle at the Halland continue the good work which has been so sadly interrupted. Hadthe prosaic finding of the coroner not finally put an end to theromantic stories which have been whispered in connection with theaffair, it might have been difficult to find a tenant for BaskervilleHall. It is understood that the next of kin is Mr. Henry Baskerville,if he be still alive, the son of Sir Charles Baskerville's youngerbrother. The young man when last heard of was in America, andinquiries are being instituted with a view to informing him of hisgood fortune."
Dr. Mortimer refolded his paper and replaced it in his pocket.
"Those are the public facts, Mr. Holmes, in connection with the deathof Sir Charles Baskerville."
"I must thank you," said Sherlock Holmes, "for calling my attentionto a case which certainly presents some features of interest. I hadobserved some newspaper comment at the time, but I was exceedinglypreoccupied by that little affair of the Vatican cameos, and in myanxiety to oblige the Pope I lost touch with several interestingEnglish cases. This article, you say, contains all the public facts?"
"It does."
"Then let me have the private ones." He leaned back, put hisfinger-tips together, and assumed his most impassive and judicialexpression.
"In doing so," said Dr. Mortimer, who had begun to show signs of somestrong emotion, "I am telling that which I have not confided toanyone. My motive for withholding it from the coroner's inquiry isthat a man of science shrinks from placing himself in the publicposition of seeming to indorse a popular superstition. I had thefurther motive that Baskerville Hall, as the paper says, wouldcertainly remain untenanted if anything were done to increase itsalready rather grim reputation. For both these reasons I thought thatI was justified in telling rather less than I knew, since nopractical good could result from it, but with you there is no reasonwhy I should not be perfectly frank.
"The moor is very sparsely inhabited, and those who live near eachother are thrown very much together. For this reason I saw a gooddeal of Sir Charles Baskerville. With the exception of Mr. Frankland,of Lafter Hall, and Mr. Stapleton, the naturalist, there are no othermen of education within many miles. Sir Charles was a retiring man,but the chance of his illness brought us together, and a community ofinterests in science kept us so. He had brought back much scientificinformation from South Africa, and many a charming evening we havespent together discussing the comparative anatomy of the Bushman andthe Hottentot.
"Within the last few months it became increasingly plain to me thatSir Charles's nervous system was strained to the breaking point. Hehad taken this legend which I have read you exceedingly to heart--somuch so that, although he would walk in his own grounds, nothingwould induce him to go out upon the moor at night. Incredible as itmay appear to you, Mr. Holmes, he was honestly convinced that adreadful fate overhung his family, and certainly the records which hewas able to give of his ancestors were not encouraging. The idea ofsome ghastly presence constantly haunted him, and on more than oneoccasion he has asked me whether I had on my medical journeys atnight ever seen any strange creature or heard the baying of a hound.The latter question he put to me several times, and always with avoice which vibrated with excitement.
"I can well remember driving up to his house in the evening somethree weeks before the fatal event. He chanced to be at his halldoor. I had descended from my gig and was standing in front of him,when I saw his eyes fix themselves over my shoulder, and stare pastme with an expression of the most dreadful horror. I whisked roundand had just time to catch a glimpse of something which I took to bea large black calf passing at the head of the drive. So excited andalarmed was he that I was compelled to go down to the spot where theanimal had been and look around for it. It was gone, however, and theincident appeared to make the worst impression upon his mind. Istayed with him all the evening, and it was on that occasion, toexplain the emotion which he had shown, that he confided to mykeeping that narrative which I read to you when first I came. Imention this small episode because it assumes some importance in viewof the tragedy which followed, but I was convinced at the time thatthe matter was entirely trivial and that his excitement had nojustification.
"It was at my advice that Sir Charles was about to go to London. Hisheart was, I knew, affected, and the constant anxiety in which helived, however chimerical the cause of it might be, was evidentlyhaving a serious effect upon his health. I thought that a few monthsamong the distractions of town would send him back a new man. Mr.Stapleton, a mutual friend who was much concerned at his state ofhealth, was of the same opinion. At the last instant came thisterrible catastrophe.
"On the night of Sir Charles's death Barrymore the butler, who madethe discovery, sent Perkins the groom on horseback to me, and as Iwas sitting up late I was able to reach Baskerville Hall within anhour of the event. I checked and corroborated all the facts whichwere mentioned at the inquest. I followed the footsteps down the YewAlley, I saw the spot at the moor-gate where he seemed to havewaited, I remarked the change in the shape of the prints after thatpoint, I noted that there were no other footsteps save those ofBarrymore on the soft gravel, and finally I carefully examined thebody, which had not been touched until my arrival. Sir Charles lay onhis face, his arms out, his fingers dug into the ground, and hisfeatures convulsed with some strong emotion to such an extent that Icould hardly have sworn to his identity. There was certainly nophysical injury of any kind. But one false statement was made byBarrymore at the inquest. He said that there were no traces upon theground round the body. He did not observe any. But I did--some littledistance off, but fresh and clear."
"Footprints?"
"Footprints."
"A man's or a woman's?"
Dr. Mortimer looked strangely at us for an instant, and his voicesank almost to a whisper as he answered:--
"Mr. Holmes, they were the footprints of a gigantic hound!"




     CHAPTER III     The Problem

I confess at these words a shudder passed through me. There was athrill in the doctor's voice which showed that he was himself deeplymoved by that which he told us. Holmes leaned forward in hisexcitement and his eyes had the hard, dry glitter which shot fromthem when he was keenly interested.
"You saw this?"
"As clearly as I see you."
"And you said nothing?"
"What was the use?"
"How was it that no one else saw it?"
"The marks were some twenty yards from the body and no one gave thema thought. I don't suppose I should have done so had I not known thislegend."
"There are many sheep-dogs on the moor?"
"No doubt, but this was no sheep-dog."
"You say it was large?"
"Enormous."
"But it had not approached the body?"
"No."
"What sort of night was it?"
"Damp and raw."
"But not actually raining?"
"No."
"What is the Alley like?"
"There are two lines of old yew hedge, twelve feet high andimpenetrable. The walk in the centre is about eight feet across."
"Is there anything between the hedges and the walk?"
"Yes, there is a strip of grass about six feet broad on either side."
"I understand that the yew hedge is penetrated at one point by agate?"
"Yes, the wicket-gate which leads on to the moor."
"Is there any other opening?"
"None."
"So that to reach the Yew Alley one either has to come down it fromthe house or else to enter it by the moor-gate?"
"There is an exit through a summer-house at the far end."
"Had Sir Charles reached this?"
"No; he lay about fifty yards from it."
"Now, tell me, Dr. Mortimer--and this is important--the marks whichyou saw were on the path and not on the grass?"
"No marks could show on the grass."
"Were they on the same side of the path as the moor-gate?"
"Yes; they were on the edge of the path on the same side as themoor-gate."
"You interest me exceedingly. Another point. Was the wicket-gateclosed?"
"Closed and padlocked."
"How high was it?"
"About four feet high."
"Then anyone could have got over it?"
"Yes."
"And what marks did you see by the wicket-gate?"
"None in particular."
"Good heaven! Did no one examine?"
"Yes, I examined myself."
"And found nothing?"
"It was all very confused. Sir Charles had evidently stood there forfive or ten minutes."
"How do you know that?"
"Because the ash had twice dropped from his cigar."
"Excellent! This is a colleague, Watson, after our own heart. But themarks?"
"He had left his own marks all over that small patch of gravel. Icould discern no others."
Sherlock Holmes struck his hand against his knee with an impatientgesture.
"If I had only been there!" he cried. "It is evidently a case ofextraordinary interest, and one which presented immense opportunitiesto the scientific expert. That gravel page upon which I might haveread so much has been long ere this smudged by the rain and defacedby the clogs of curious peasants. Oh, Dr. Mortimer, Dr. Mortimer, tothink that you should not have called me in! You have indeed much toanswer for."
"I could not call you in, Mr. Holmes, without disclosing these factsto the world, and I have already given my reasons for not wishing todo so. Besides, besides--"
"Why do you hesitate?"
"There is a realm in which the most acute and most experienced ofdetectives is helpless."
"You mean that the thing is supernatural?"
"I did not positively say so."
"No, but you evidently think it."
"Since the tragedy, Mr. Holmes, there have come to my ears severalincidents which are hard to reconcile with the settled order ofNature."
"For example?"
"I find that before the terrible event occurred several people hadseen a creature upon the moor which corresponds with this Baskervilledemon, and which could not possibly be any animal known to science.They all agreed that it was a huge creature, luminous, ghastly, andspectral. I have cross-examined these men, one of them a hard-headedcountryman, one a farrier, and one a moorland farmer, who all tellthe same story of this dreadful apparition, exactly corresponding tothe hell-hound of the legend. I assure you that there is a reign ofterror in the district, and that it is a hardy man who will cross themoor at night."
"And you, a trained man of science, believe it to be supernatural?"
"I do not know what to believe."
Holmes shrugged his shoulders.
"I have hitherto confined my investigations to this world," said he."In a modest way I have combated evil, but to take on the Father ofEvil himself would, perhaps, be too ambitious a task. Yet you mustadmit that the footmark is material."
"The original hound was material enough to tug a man's throat out,and yet he was diabolical as well."
"I see that you have quite gone over to the supernaturalists. Butnow, Dr. Mortimer, tell me this. If you hold these views, why haveyou come to consult me at all? You tell me in the same breath that itis useless to investigate Sir Charles's death, and that you desire meto do it."
"I did not say that I desired you to do it."
"Then, how can I assist you?"
"By advising me as to what I should do with Sir Henry Baskerville,who arrives at Waterloo Station"--Dr. Mortimer looked at hiswatch--"in exactly one hour and a quarter."
"He being the heir?"
"Yes. On the death of Sir Charles we inquired for this younggentleman and found that he had been farming in Canada. From theaccounts which have reached us he is an excellent fellow in everyway. I speak not as a medical man but as a trustee and executor ofSir Charles's will."
"There is no other claimant, I presume?"
"None. The only other kinsman whom we have been able to trace wasRodger Baskerville, the youngest of three brothers of whom poor SirCharles was the elder. The second brother, who died young, is thefather of this lad Henry. The third, Rodger, was the black sheep ofthe family. He came of the old masterful Baskerville strain, and wasthe very image, they tell me, of the family picture of old Hugo. Hemade England too hot to hold him, fled to Central America, and diedthere in 1876 of yellow fever. Henry is the last of the Baskervilles.In one hour and five minutes I meet him at Waterloo Station. I havehad a wire that he arrived at Southampton this morning. Now, Mr.Holmes, what would you advise me to do with him?"
"Why should he not go to the home of his fathers?"
"It seems natural, does it not? And yet, consider that everyBaskerville who goes there meets with an evil fate. I feel sure thatif Sir Charles could have spoken with me before his death he wouldhave warned me against bringing this, the last of the old race, andthe heir to great wealth, to that deadly place. And yet it cannot bedenied that the prosperity of the whole poor, bleak country-sidedepends upon his presence. All the good work which has been done bySir Charles will crash to the ground if there is no tenant of theHall. I fear lest I should be swayed too much by my own obviousinterest in the matter, and that is why I bring the case before youand ask for your advice."
Holmes considered for a little time.
"Put into plain words, the matter is this," said he. "In your opinionthere is a diabolical agency which makes Dartmoor an unsafe abode fora Baskerville--that is your opinion?"
"At least I might go the length of saying that there is some evidencethat this may be so."
"Exactly. But surely, if your supernatural theory be correct, itcould work the young man evil in London as easily as in Devonshire. Adevil with merely local powers like a parish vestry would be tooinconceivable a thing."
"You put the matter more flippantly, Mr. Holmes, than you wouldprobably do if you were brought into personal contact with thesethings. Your advice, then, as I understand it, is that the young manwill be as safe in Devonshire as in London. He comes in fiftyminutes. What would you recommend?"
"I recommend, sir, that you take a cab, call off your spaniel who isscratching at my front door, and proceed to Waterloo to meet SirHenry Baskerville."
"And then?"
"And then you will say nothing to him at all until I have made up mymind about the matter."
"How long will it take you to make up your mind?"
"Twenty-four hours. At ten o'clock to-morrow, Dr. Mortimer, I will bemuch obliged to you if you will call upon me here, and it will be ofhelp to me in my plans for the future if you will bring Sir HenryBaskerville with you."
"I will do so, Mr. Holmes." He scribbled the appointment on hisshirtcuff and hurried off in his strange, peering, absent-mindedfashion. Holmes stopped him at the head of the stair.
"Only one more question, Dr. Mortimer. You say that before SirCharles Baskerville's death several people saw this apparition uponthe moor?"
"Three people did."
"Did any see it after?"
"I have not heard of any."
"Thank you. Good morning."
Holmes returned to his seat with that quiet look of inwardsatisfaction which meant that he had a congenial task before him.
"Going out, Watson?"
"Unless I can help you."
"No, my dear fellow, it is at the hour of action that I turn to youfor aid. But this is splendid, really unique from some points ofview. When you pass Bradley's, would you ask him to send up a poundof the strongest shag tobacco? Thank you. It would be as well if youcould make it convenient not to return before evening. Then I shouldbe very glad to compare impressions as to this most interestingproblem which has been submitted to us this morning."
I knew that seclusion and solitude were very necessary for my friendin those hours of intense mental concentration during which heweighed every particle of evidence, constructed alternative theories,balanced one against the other, and made up his mind as to whichpoints were essential and which immaterial. I therefore spent the dayat my club and did not return to Baker Street until evening. It wasnearly nine o'clock when I found myself in the sitting-room oncemore.
My first impression as I opened the door was that a fire had brokenout, for the room was so filled with smoke that the light of the lampupon the table was blurred by it. As I entered, however, my fearswere set at rest, for it was the acrid fumes of strong coarse tobaccowhich took me by the throat and set me coughing. Through the haze Ihad a vague vision of Holmes in his dressing-gown coiled up in anarmchair with his black clay pipe between his lips. Several rolls ofpaper lay around him.
"Caught cold, Watson?" said he.
"No, it's this poisonous atmosphere."
"I suppose it is pretty thick, now that you mention it."
"Thick! It is intolerable."
"Open the window, then! You have been at your club all day, Iperceive."
"My dear Holmes!"
"Am I right?"
"Certainly, but how?"
He laughed at my bewildered expression.
"There is a delightful freshness about you, Watson, which makes it apleasure to exercise any small powers which I possess at yourexpense. A gentleman goes forth on a showery and miry day. He returnsimmaculate in the evening with the gloss still on his hat and hisboots. He has been a fixture therefore all day. He is not a man withintimate friends. Where, then, could he have been? Is it notobvious?"
"Well, it is rather obvious."
"The world is full of obvious things which nobody by any chance everobserves. Where do you think that I have been?"
"A fixture also."
"On the contrary, I have been to Devonshire."
"In spirit?"
"Exactly. My body has remained in this arm-chair and has, I regret toobserve, consumed in my absence two large pots of coffee and anincredible amount of tobacco. After you left I sent down toStamford's for the Ordnance map of this portion of the moor, and myspirit has hovered over it all day. I flatter myself that I couldfind my way about."
"A large scale map, I presume?"
"Very large." He unrolled one section and held it over his knee."Here you have the particular district which concerns us. That isBaskerville Hall in the middle."
"With a wood round it?"
"Exactly. I fancy the Yew Alley, though not marked under that name,must stretch along this line, with the moor, as you perceive, uponthe right of it. This small clump of buildings here is the hamlet ofGrimpen, where our friend Dr. Mortimer has his headquarters. Within aradius of five miles there are, as you see, only a very few scattereddwellings. Here is Lafter Hall, which was mentioned in the narrative.There is a house indicated here which may be the residence of thenaturalist--Stapleton, if I remember right, was his name. Here aretwo moorland farm-houses, High Tor and Foulmire. Then fourteen milesaway the great convict prison of Princetown. Between and around thesescattered points extends the desolate, lifeless moor. This, then, isthe stage upon which tragedy has been played, and upon which we mayhelp to play it again."
"It must be a wild place."
"Yes, the setting is a worthy one. If the devil did desire to have ahand in the affairs of men--"
"Then you are yourself inclining to the supernatural explanation."
"The devil's agents may be of flesh and blood, may they not? Thereare two questions waiting for us at the outset. The one is whetherany crime has been committed at all; the second is, what is the crimeand how was it committed? Of course, if Dr. Mortimer's surmise shouldbe correct, and we are dealing with forces outside the ordinary lawsof Nature, there is an end of our investigation. But we are bound toexhaust all other hypotheses before falling back upon this one. Ithink we'll shut that window again, if you don't mind. It is asingular thing, but I find that a concentrated atmosphere helps aconcentration of thought. I have not pushed it to the length ofgetting into a box to think, but that is the logical outcome of myconvictions. Have you turned the case over in your mind?"
"Yes, I have thought a good deal of it in the course of the day."
"What do you make of it?"
"It is very bewildering."
"It has certainly a character of its own. There are points ofdistinction about it. That change in the footprints, for example.What do you make of that?"
"Mortimer said that the man had walked on tiptoe down that portion ofthe alley."
"He only repeated what some fool had said at the inquest. Why shoulda man walk on tiptoe down the alley?"
"What then?"
"He was running, Watson--running desperately, running for his life,running until he burst his heart and fell dead upon his face."
"Running from what?"
"There lies our problem. There are indications that the man wascrazed with fear before ever he began to run."
"How can you say that?"
"I am presuming that the cause of his fears came to him across themoor. If that were so, and it seems most probable, only a man who hadlost his wits would have run from the house instead of towards it. Ifthe gipsy's evidence may be taken as true, he ran with cries for helpin the direction where help was least likely to be. Then, again, whomwas he waiting for that night, and why was he waiting for him in theYew Alley rather than in his own house?"
"You think that he was waiting for someone?"
"The man was elderly and infirm. We can understand his taking anevening stroll, but the ground was damp and the night inclement. Isit natural that he should stand for five or ten minutes, as Dr.Mortimer, with more practical sense than I should have given himcredit for, deduced from the cigar ash?"
"But he went out every evening."
"I think it unlikely that he waited at the moor-gate every evening.On the contrary, the evidence is that he avoided the moor. That nighthe waited there. It was the night before he made his departure forLondon. The thing takes shape, Watson. It becomes coherent. Might Iask you to hand me my violin, and we will postpone all furtherthought upon this business until we have had the advantage of meetingDr. Mortimer and Sir Henry Baskerville in the morning."




     CHAPTER IV     Sir Henry Baskerville

Our breakfast-table was cleared early, and Holmes waited in hisdressing-gown for the promised interview. Our clients were punctualto their appointment, for the clock had just struck ten when Dr.Mortimer was shown up, followed by the young baronet. The latter wasa small, alert, dark-eyed man about thirty years of age, verysturdily built, with thick black eyebrows and a strong, pugnaciousface. He wore a ruddy-tinted tweed suit and had the weather-beatenappearance of one who has spent most of his time in the open air, andyet there was something in his steady eye and the quiet assurance ofhis bearing which indicated the gentleman.
"This is Sir Henry Baskerville," said Dr. Mortimer.
"Why, yes," said he, "and the strange thing is, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,that if my friend here had not proposed coming round to you thismorning I should have come on my own account. I understand that youthink out little puzzles, and I've had one this morning which wantsmore thinking out than I am able to give it."
"Pray take a seat, Sir Henry. Do I understand you to say that youhave yourself had some remarkable experience since you arrived inLondon?"
"Nothing of much importance, Mr. Holmes. Only a joke, as like as not.It was this letter, if you can call it a letter, which reached methis morning."
He laid an envelope upon the table, and we all bent over it. It wasof common quality, grayish in colour. The address, "Sir HenryBaskerville, Northumberland Hotel," was printed in rough characters;the postmark "Charing Cross," and the date of posting the precedingevening.
"Who knew that you were going to the Northumberland Hotel?" askedHolmes, glancing keenly across at our visitor.
"No one could have known. We only decided after I met Dr. Mortimer."
"But Dr. Mortimer was no doubt already stopping there?"
"No, I had been staying with a friend," said the doctor. "There wasno possible indication that we intended to go to this hotel."
"Hum! Someone seems to be very deeply interested in your movements."Out of the envelope he took a half-sheet of foolscap paper foldedinto four. This he opened and spread flat upon the table. Across themiddle of it a single sentence had been formed by the expedient ofpasting printed words upon it. It ran:
As you value your life or your reason keep away from the moor.
The word "moor" only was printed in ink.
"Now," said Sir Henry Baskerville, "perhaps you will tell me, Mr.Holmes, what in thunder is the meaning of that, and who it is thattakes so much interest in my affairs?"
"What do you make of it, Dr. Mortimer? You must allow that there isnothing supernatural about this, at any rate?"
"No, sir, but it might very well come from someone who was convincedthat the business is supernatural."
"What business?" asked Sir Henry sharply. "It seems to me that allyou gentlemen know a great deal more than I do about my own affairs."
"You shall share our knowledge before you leave this room, Sir Henry.I promise you that," said Sherlock Holmes. "We will confine ourselvesfor the present with your permission to this very interestingdocument, which must have been put together and posted yesterdayevening. Have you yesterday's Times, Watson?"
"It is here in the corner."
"Might I trouble you for it--the inside page, please, with theleading articles?" He glanced swiftly over it, running his eyes upand down the columns. "Capital article this on free trade. Permit meto give you an extract from it.
"'You may be cajoled into imagining that your own special trade oryour own industry will be encouraged by a protective tariff, but itstands to reason that such legislation must in the long run keep awaywealth from the country, diminish the value of our imports, and lowerthe general conditions of life in this island.'
"What do you think of that, Watson?" cried Holmes in high glee,rubbing his hands together with satisfaction. "Don't you think thatis an admirable sentiment?"
Dr. Mortimer looked at Holmes with an air of professional interest,and Sir Henry Baskerville turned a pair of puzzled dark eyes upon me.
"I don't know much about the tariff and things of that kind," saidhe; "but it seems to me we've got a bit off the trail so far as thatnote is concerned."
"On the contrary, I think we are particularly hot upon the trail, SirHenry. Watson here knows more about my methods than you do, but Ifear that even he has not quite grasped the significance of thissentence."
"No, I confess that I see no connection."
"And yet, my dear Watson, there is so very close a connection thatthe one is extracted out of the other. 'You,' 'your,' 'your,' 'life,''reason,' 'value,' 'keep away,' 'from the.' Don't you see now whencethese words have been taken?"
"By thunder, you're right! Well, if that isn't smart!" cried SirHenry.
"If any possible doubt remained it is settled by the fact that 'keepaway' and 'from the' are cut out in one piece."
"Well, now--so it is!"
"Really, Mr. Holmes, this exceeds anything which I could haveimagined," said Dr. Mortimer, gazing at my friend in amazement. "Icould understand anyone saying that the words were from a newspaper;but that you should name which, and add that it came from the leadingarticle, is really one of the most remarkable things which I haveever known. How did you do it?"
"I presume, Doctor, that you could tell the skull of a negro fromthat of an Esquimau?"
"Most certainly."
"But how?"
"Because that is my special hobby. The differences are obvious. Thesupra-orbital crest, the facial angle, the maxillary curve, the--"
"But this is my special hobby, and the differences are equallyobvious. There is as much difference to my eyes between the leadedbourgeois type of a Times article and the slovenly print of anevening half-penny paper as there could be between your negro andyour Esquimau. The detection of types is one of the most elementarybranches of knowledge to the special expert in crime, though Iconfess that once when I was very young I confused the Leeds Mercurywith the Western Morning News. But a Times leader is entirelydistinctive, and these words could have been taken from nothing else.As it was done yesterday the strong probability was that we shouldfind the words in yesterday's issue."
"So far as I can follow you, then, Mr. Holmes," said Sir HenryBaskerville, "someone cut out this message with a scissors--"
"Nail-scissors," said Holmes. "You can see that it was a veryshort-bladed scissors, since the cutter had to take two snips over'keep away.'"
"That is so. Someone, then, cut out the message with a pair ofshort-bladed scissors, pasted it with paste--"
"Gum," said Holmes.
"With gum on to the paper. But I want to know why the word 'moor'should have been written?"
"Because he could not find it in print. The other words were allsimple and might be found in any issue, but 'moor' would be lesscommon."
"Why, of course, that would explain it. Have you read anything elsein this message, Mr. Holmes?"
"There are one or two indications, and yet the utmost pains have beentaken to remove all clues. The address, you observe is printed inrough characters. But the Times is a paper which is seldom found inany hands but those of the highly educated. We may take it,therefore, that the letter was composed by an educated man who wishedto pose as an uneducated one, and his effort to conceal his ownwriting suggests that that writing might be known, or come to beknown, by you. Again, you will observe that the words are not gummedon in an accurate line, but that some are much higher than others.'Life,' for example is quite out of its proper place. That may pointto carelessness or it may point to agitation and hurry upon the partof the cutter. On the whole I incline to the latter view, since thematter was evidently important, and it is unlikely that the composerof such a letter would be careless. If he were in a hurry it opens upthe interesting question why he should be in a hurry, since anyletter posted up to early morning would reach Sir Henry before hewould leave his hotel. Did the composer fear an interruption--andfrom whom?"
"We are coming now rather into the region of guesswork," said Dr.Mortimer.
"Say, rather, into the region where we balance probabilities andchoose the most likely. It is the scientific use of the imagination,but we have always some material basis on which to start ourspeculation. Now, you would call it a guess, no doubt, but I amalmost certain that this address has been written in a hotel."
"How in the world can you say that?"
"If you examine it carefully you will see that both the pen and theink have given the writer trouble. The pen has spluttered twice in asingle word, and has run dry three times in a short address, showingthat there was very little ink in the bottle. Now, a private pen orink-bottle is seldom allowed to be in such a state, and thecombination of the two must be quite rare. But you know the hotel inkand the hotel pen, where it is rare to get anything else. Yes, I havevery little hesitation in saying that could we examine thewaste-paper baskets of the hotels around Charing Cross until we foundthe remains of the mutilated Times leader we could lay our handsstraight upon the person who sent this singular message. Halloa!Halloa! What's this?"
He was carefully examining the foolscap, upon which the words werepasted, holding it only an inch or two from his eyes.
"Well?"
"Nothing," said he, throwing it down. "It is a blank half-sheet ofpaper, without even a water-mark upon it. I think we have drawn asmuch as we can from this curious letter; and now, Sir Henry, hasanything else of interest happened to you since you have been inLondon?"
"Why, no, Mr. Holmes. I think not."
"You have not observed anyone follow or watch you?"
"I seem to have walked right into the thick of a dime novel," saidour visitor. "Why in thunder should anyone follow or watch me?"
"We are coming to that. You have nothing else to report to us beforewe go into this matter?"
"Well, it depends upon what you think worth reporting."
"I think anything out of the ordinary routine of life well worthreporting."
Sir Henry smiled.
"I don't know much of British life yet, for I have spent nearly allmy time in the States and in Canada. But I hope that to lose one ofyour boots is not part of the ordinary routine of life over here."
"You have lost one of your boots?"
"My dear sir," cried Dr. Mortimer, "it is only mislaid. You will findit when you return to the hotel. What is the use of troubling Mr.Holmes with trifles of this kind?"
"Well, he asked me for anything outside the ordinary routine."
"Exactly," said Holmes, "however foolish the incident may seem. Youhave lost one of your boots, you say?"
"Well, mislaid it, anyhow. I put them both outside my door lastnight, and there was only one in the morning. I could get no senseout of the chap who cleans them. The worst of it is that I onlybought the pair last night in the Strand, and I have never had themon."
"If you have never worn them, why did you put them out to becleaned?"
"They were tan boots and had never been varnished. That was why I putthem out."
"Then I understand that on your arrival in London yesterday you wentout at once and bought a pair of boots?"
"I did a good deal of shopping. Dr. Mortimer here went round with me.You see, if I am to be squire down there I must dress the part, andit may be that I have got a little careless in my ways out West.Among other things I bought these brown boots--gave six dollars forthem--and had one stolen before ever I had them on my feet."
"It seems a singularly useless thing to steal," said Sherlock Holmes."I confess that I share Dr. Mortimer's belief that it will not belong before the missing boot is found."
"And, now, gentlemen," said the baronet with decision, "it seems tome that I have spoken quite enough about the little that I know. Itis time that you kept your promise and gave me a full account of whatwe are all driving at."
"Your request is a very reasonable one," Holmes answered. "Dr.Mortimer, I think you could not do better than to tell your story asyou told it to us."
Thus encouraged, our scientific friend drew his papers from hispocket, and presented the whole case as he had done upon the morningbefore. Sir Henry Baskerville listened with the deepest attention,and with an occasional exclamation of surprise.
"Well, I seem to have come into an inheritance with a vengeance,"said he when the long narrative was finished. "Of course, I've heardof the hound ever since I was in the nursery. It's the pet story ofthe family, though I never thought of taking it seriously before. Butas to my uncle's death--well, it all seems boiling up in my head, andI can't get it clear yet. You don't seem quite to have made up yourmind whether it's a case for a policeman or a clergyman."
"Precisely."
"And now there's this affair of the letter to me at the hotel. Isuppose that fits into its place."
"It seems to show that someone knows more than we do about what goeson upon the moor," said Dr. Mortimer.
"And also," said Holmes, "that someone is not ill-disposed towardsyou, since they warn you of danger."
"Or it may be that they wish, for their own purposes, to scare meaway."
"Well, of course, that is possible also. I am very much indebted toyou, Dr. Mortimer, for introducing me to a problem which presentsseveral interesting alternatives. But the practical point which wenow have to decide, Sir Henry, is whether it is or is not advisablefor you to go to Baskerville Hall."
"Why should I not go?"
"There seems to be danger."
"Do you mean danger from this family fiend or do you mean danger fromhuman beings?"
"Well, that is what we have to find out."
"Whichever it is, my answer is fixed. There is no devil in hell, Mr.Holmes, and there is no man upon earth who can prevent me from goingto the home of my own people, and you may take that to be my finalanswer." His dark brows knitted and his face flushed to a dusky redas he spoke. It was evident that the fiery temper of the Baskervilleswas not extinct in this their last representative. "Meanwhile," saidhe, "I have hardly had time to think over all that you have told me.It's a big thing for a man to have to understand and to decide at onesitting. I should like to have a quiet hour by myself to make up mymind. Now, look here, Mr. Holmes, it's half-past eleven now and I amgoing back right away to my hotel. Suppose you and your friend, Dr.Watson, come round and lunch with us at two. I'll be able to tell youmore clearly then how this thing strikes me."
"Is that convenient to you, Watson?"
"Perfectly."
"Then you may expect us. Shall I have a cab called?"
"I'd prefer to walk, for this affair has flurried me rather."
"I'll join you in a walk, with pleasure," said his companion.
"Then we meet again at two o'clock. Au revoir, and good-morning!"
We heard the steps of our visitors descend the stair and the bang ofthe front door. In an instant Holmes had changed from the languiddreamer to the man of action.
"Your hat and boots, Watson, quick! Not a moment to lose!" He rushedinto his room in his dressing-gown and was back again in a fewseconds in a frock-coat. We hurried together down the stairs and intothe street. Dr. Mortimer and Baskerville were still visible about twohundred yards ahead of us in the direction of Oxford Street.
"Shall I run on and stop them?"
"Not for the world, my dear Watson. I am perfectly satisfied withyour company if you will tolerate mine. Our friends are wise, for itis certainly a very fine morning for a walk."
He quickened his pace until we had decreased the distance whichdivided us by about half. Then, still keeping a hundred yards behind,we followed into Oxford Street and so down Regent Street. Once ourfriends stopped and stared into a shop window, upon which Holmes didthe same. An instant afterwards he gave a little cry of satisfaction,and, following the direction of his eager eyes, I saw that a hansomcab with a man inside which had halted on the other side of thestreet was now proceeding slowly onward again.
"There's our man, Watson! Come along! We'll have a good look at him,if we can do no more."
At that instant I was aware of a bushy black beard and a pair ofpiercing eyes turned upon us through the side window of the cab.Instantly the trapdoor at the top flew up, something was screamed tothe driver, and the cab flew madly off down Regent Street. Holmeslooked eagerly round for another, but no empty one was in sight. Thenhe dashed in wild pursuit amid the stream of the traffic, but thestart was too great, and already the cab was out of sight.
"There now!" said Holmes bitterly as he emerged panting and whitewith vexation from the tide of vehicles. "Was ever such bad luck andsuch bad management, too? Watson, Watson, if you are an honest manyou will record this also and set it against my successes!"
"Who was the man?"
"I have not an idea."
"A spy?"
"Well, it was evident from what we have heard that Baskerville hasbeen very closely shadowed by someone since he has been in town. Howelse could it be known so quickly that it was the NorthumberlandHotel which he had chosen? If they had followed him the first day Iargued that they would follow him also the second. You may haveobserved that I twice strolled over to the window while Dr. Mortimerwas reading his legend."
"Yes, I remember."
"I was looking out for loiterers in the street, but I saw none. Weare dealing with a clever man, Watson. This matter cuts very deep,and though I have not finally made up my mind whether it is abenevolent or a malevolent agency which is in touch with us, I amconscious always of power and design. When our friends left I at oncefollowed them in the hopes of marking down their invisible attendant.So wily was he that he had not trusted himself upon foot, but he hadavailed himself of a cab so that he could loiter behind or dash pastthem and so escape their notice. His method had the additionaladvantage that if they were to take a cab he was all ready to followthem. It has, however, one obvious disadvantage."
"It puts him in the power of the cabman."
"Exactly."
"What a pity we did not get the number!"
"My dear Watson, clumsy as I have been, you surely do not seriouslyimagine that I neglected to get the number? No. 2704 is our man. Butthat is no use to us for the moment."
"I fail to see how you could have done more."
"On observing the cab I should have instantly turned and walked inthe other direction. I should then at my leisure have hired a secondcab and followed the first at a respectful distance, or, betterstill, have driven to the Northumberland Hotel and waited there. Whenour unknown had followed Baskerville home we should have had theopportunity of playing his own game upon himself and seeing where hemade for. As it is, by an indiscreet eagerness, which was takenadvantage of with extraordinary quickness and energy by our opponent,we have betrayed ourselves and lost our man."
We had been sauntering slowly down Regent Street during thisconversation, and Dr. Mortimer, with his companion, had long vanishedin front of us.
"There is no object in our following them," said Holmes. "The shadowhas departed and will not return. We must see what further cards wehave in our hands and play them with decision. Could you swear tothat man's face within the cab?"
"I could swear only to the beard."
"And so could I--from which I gather that in all probability it was afalse one. A clever man upon so delicate an errand has no use for abeard save to conceal his features. Come in here, Watson!"
He turned into one of the district messenger offices, where he waswarmly greeted by the manager.
"Ah, Wilson, I see you have not forgotten the little case in which Ihad the good fortune to help you?"
"No, sir, indeed I have not. You saved my good name, and perhaps mylife."
"My dear fellow, you exaggerate. I have some recollection, Wilson,that you had among your boys a lad named Cartwright, who showed someability during the investigation."
"Yes, sir, he is still with us."
"Could you ring him up?--thank you! And I should be glad to havechange of this five-pound note."
A lad of fourteen, with a bright, keen face, had obeyed the summonsof the manager. He stood now gazing with great reverence at thefamous detective.
"Let me have the Hotel Directory," said Holmes. "Thank you! Now,Cartwright, there are the names of twenty-three hotels here, all inthe immediate neighbourhood of Charing Cross. Do you see?"
"Yes, sir."
"You will visit each of these in turn."
"Yes, sir."
"You will begin in each case by giving the outside porter oneshilling. Here are twenty-three shillings."
"Yes, sir."
"You will tell him that you want to see the waste-paper of yesterday.You will say that an important telegram has miscarried and that youare looking for it. You understand?"
"Yes, sir."
"But what you are really looking for is the centre page of the Timeswith some holes cut in it with scissors. Here is a copy of the Times.It is this page. You could easily recognize it, could you not?"
"Yes, sir."
"In each case the outside porter will send for the hall porter, towhom also you will give a shilling. Here are twenty-three shillings.You will then learn in possibly twenty cases out of the twenty-threethat the waste of the day before has been burned or removed. In thethree other cases you will be shown a heap of paper and you will lookfor this page of the Times among it. The odds are enormously againstyour finding it. There are ten shillings over in case of emergencies.Let me have a report by wire at Baker Street before evening. And now,Watson, it only remains for us to find out by wire the identity ofthe cabman, No. 2704, and then we will drop into one of the BondStreet picture galleries and fill in the time until we are due at thehotel."




     CHAPTER V     Three Broken Threads

Sherlock Holmes had, in a very remarkable degree, the power ofdetaching his mind at will. For two hours the strange business inwhich we had been involved appeared to be forgotten, and he wasentirely absorbed in the pictures of the modern Belgian masters. Hewould talk of nothing but art, of which he had the crudest ideas,from our leaving the gallery until we found ourselves at theNorthumberland Hotel.
"Sir Henry Baskerville is upstairs expecting you," said the clerk."He asked me to show you up at once when you came."
"Have you any objection to my looking at your register?" said Holmes.
"Not in the least."
The book showed that two names had been added after that ofBaskerville. One was Theophilus Johnson and family, of Newcastle; theother Mrs. Oldmore and maid, of High Lodge, Alton.
"Surely that must be the same Johnson whom I used to know," saidHolmes to the porter. "A lawyer, is he not, gray-headed, and walkswith a limp?"
"No, sir; this is Mr. Johnson, the coal-owner, a very activegentleman, not older than yourself."
"Surely you are mistaken about his trade?"
"No, sir! he has used this hotel for many years, and he is very wellknown to us."
"Ah, that settles it. Mrs. Oldmore, too; I seem to remember the name.Excuse my curiosity, but often in calling upon one friend one findsanother."
"She is an invalid lady, sir. Her husband was once mayor ofGloucester. She always comes to us when she is in town."
"Thank you; I am afraid I cannot claim her acquaintance. We haveestablished a most important fact by these questions, Watson," hecontinued in a low voice as we went upstairs together. "We know nowthat the people who are so interested in our friend have not settleddown in his own hotel. That means that while they are, as we haveseen, very anxious to watch him, they are equally anxious that heshould not see them. Now, this is a most suggestive fact."
"What does it suggest?"
"It suggests--halloa, my dear fellow, what on earth is the matter?"
As we came round the top of the stairs we had run up against SirHenry Baskerville himself. His face was flushed with anger, and heheld an old and dusty boot in one of his hands. So furious was hethat he was hardly articulate, and when he did speak it was in a muchbroader and more Western dialect than any which we had heard from himin the morning.
"Seems to me they are playing me for a sucker in this hotel," hecried. "They'll find they've started in to monkey with the wrong manunless they are careful. By thunder, if that chap can't find mymissing boot there will be trouble. I can take a joke with the best,Mr. Holmes, but they've got a bit over the mark this time."
"Still looking for your boot?"
"Yes, sir, and mean to find it."
"But, surely, you said that it was a new brown boot?"
"So it was, sir. And now it's an old black one."
"What! you don't mean to say--?"
"That's just what I do mean to say. I only had three pairs in theworld--the new brown, the old black, and the patent leathers, which Iam wearing. Last night they took one of my brown ones, and to-daythey have sneaked one of the black. Well, have you got it? Speak out,man, and don't stand staring!"
An agitated German waiter had appeared upon the scene.
"No, sir; I have made inquiry all over the hotel, but I can hear noword of it."
"Well, either that boot comes back before sundown or I'll see themanager and tell him that I go right straight out of this hotel."
"It shall be found, sir--I promise you that if you will have a littlepatience it will be found."
"Mind it is, for it's the last thing of mine that I'll lose in thisden of thieves. Well, well, Mr. Holmes, you'll excuse my troublingyou about such a trifle--"
"I think it's well worth troubling about."
"Why, you look very serious over it."
"How do you explain it?"
"I just don't attempt to explain it. It seems the very maddest,queerest thing that ever happened to me."
"The queerest perhaps--" said Holmes, thoughtfully.
"What do you make of it yourself?"
"Well, I don't profess to understand it yet. This case of yours isvery complex, Sir Henry. When taken in conjunction with your uncle'sdeath I am not sure that of all the five hundred cases of capitalimportance which I have handled there is one which cuts so deep. Butwe hold several threads in our hands, and the odds are that one orother of them guides us to the truth. We may waste time in followingthe wrong one, but sooner or later we must come upon the right."
We had a pleasant luncheon in which little was said of the businesswhich had brought us together. It was in the private sitting-room towhich we afterwards repaired that Holmes asked Baskerville what werehis intentions.
"To go to Baskerville Hall."
"And when?"
"At the end of the week."
"On the whole," said Holmes, "I think that your decision is a wiseone. I have ample evidence that you are being dogged in London, andamid the millions of this great city it is difficult to discover whothese people are or what their object can be. If their intentions areevil they might do you a mischief, and we should be powerless toprevent it. You did not know, Dr. Mortimer, that you were followedthis morning from my house?"
Dr. Mortimer started violently.
"Followed! By whom?"
"That, unfortunately, is what I cannot tell you. Have you among yourneighbours or acquaintances on Dartmoor any man with a black, fullbeard?"
"No--or, let me see--why, yes. Barrymore, Sir Charles's butler, is aman with a full, black beard."
"Ha! Where is Barrymore?"
"He is in charge of the Hall."
"We had best ascertain if he is really there, or if by anypossibility he might be in London."
"How can you do that?"
"Give me a telegraph form. 'Is all ready for Sir Henry?' That willdo. Address to Mr. Barrymore, Baskerville Hall. What is the nearesttelegraph-office? Grimpen. Very good, we will send a second wire tothe postmaster, Grimpen: 'Telegram to Mr. Barrymore to be deliveredinto his own hand. If absent, please return wire to Sir HenryBaskerville, Northumberland Hotel.' That should let us know beforeevening whether Barrymore is at his post in Devonshire or not."
"That's so," said Baskerville. "By the way, Dr. Mortimer, who is thisBarrymore, anyhow?"
"He is the son of the old caretaker, who is dead. They have lookedafter the Hall for four generations now. So far as I know, he and hiswife are as respectable a couple as any in the county."
"At the same time," said Baskerville, "it's clear enough that so longas there are none of the family at the Hall these people have amighty fine home and nothing to do."
"That is true."
"Did Barrymore profit at all by Sir Charles's will?" asked Holmes.
"He and his wife had five hundred pounds each."
"Ha! Did they know that they would receive this?"
"Yes; Sir Charles was very fond of talking about the provisions ofhis will."
"That is very interesting."
"I hope," said Dr. Mortimer, "that you do not look with suspiciouseyes upon everyone who received a legacy from Sir Charles, for I alsohad a thousand pounds left to me."
"Indeed! And anyone else?"
"There were many insignificant sums to individuals, and a largenumber of public charities. The residue all went to Sir Henry."
"And how much was the residue?"
"Seven hundred and forty thousand pounds."
Holmes raised his eyebrows in surprise. "I had no idea that sogigantic a sum was involved," said he.
"Sir Charles had the reputation of being rich, but we did not knowhow very rich he was until we came to examine his securities. Thetotal value of the estate was close on to a million."
"Dear me! It is a stake for which a man might well play a desperategame. And one more question, Dr. Mortimer. Supposing that anythinghappened to our young friend here--you will forgive the unpleasanthypothesis!--who would inherit the estate?"
"Since Rodger Baskerville, Sir Charles's younger brother diedunmarried, the estate would descend to the Desmonds, who are distantcousins. James Desmond is an elderly clergyman in Westmoreland."
"Thank you. These details are all of great interest. Have you met Mr.James Desmond?"
"Yes; he once came down to visit Sir Charles. He is a man ofvenerable appearance and of saintly life. I remember that he refusedto accept any settlement from Sir Charles, though he pressed it uponhim."
"And this man of simple tastes would be the heir to Sir Charles'sthousands."
"He would be the heir to the estate because that is entailed. Hewould also be the heir to the money unless it were willed otherwiseby the present owner, who can, of course, do what he likes with it."
"And have you made your will, Sir Henry?"
"No, Mr. Holmes, I have not. I've had no time, for it was onlyyesterday that I learned how matters stood. But in any case I feelthat the money should go with the title and estate. That was my pooruncle's idea. How is the owner going to restore the glories of theBaskervilles if he has not money enough to keep up the property?House, land, and dollars must go together."
"Quite so. Well, Sir Henry, I am of one mind with you as to theadvisability of your going down to Devonshire without delay. There isonly one provision which I must make. You certainly must not goalone."
"Dr. Mortimer returns with me."
"But Dr. Mortimer has his practice to attend to, and his house ismiles away from yours. With all the good will in the world he may beunable to help you. No, Sir Henry, you must take with you someone, atrusty man, who will be always by your side."
"Is it possible that you could come yourself, Mr. Holmes?"
"If matters came to a crisis I should endeavour to be present inperson; but you can understand that, with my extensive consultingpractice and with the constant appeals which reach me from manyquarters, it is impossible for me to be absent from London for anindefinite time. At the present instant one of the most revered namesin England is being besmirched by a blackmailer, and only I can stopa disastrous scandal. You will see how impossible it is for me to goto Dartmoor."
"Whom would you recommend, then?"
Holmes laid his hand upon my arm.
"If my friend would undertake it there is no man who is better worthhaving at your side when you are in a tight place. No one can say somore confidently than I."
The proposition took me completely by surprise, but before I had timeto answer, Baskerville seized me by the hand and wrung it heartily.
"Well, now, that is real kind of you, Dr. Watson," said he. "You seehow it is with me, and you know just as much about the matter as Ido. If you will come down to Baskerville Hall and see me through I'llnever forget it."
The promise of adventure had always a fascination for me, and I wascomplimented by the words of Holmes and by the eagerness with whichthe baronet hailed me as a companion.
"I will come, with pleasure," said I. "I do not know how I couldemploy my time better."
"And you will report very carefully to me," said Holmes. "When acrisis comes, as it will do, I will direct how you shall act. Isuppose that by Saturday all might be ready?"
"Would that suit Dr. Watson?"
"Perfectly."
"Then on Saturday, unless you hear to the contrary, we shall meet atthe 10.30 train from Paddington."
We had risen to depart when Baskerville gave a cry, of triumph, anddiving into one of the corners of the room he drew a brown boot fromunder a cabinet.
"My missing boot!" he cried.
"May all our difficulties vanish as easily!" said Sherlock Holmes.
"But it is a very singular thing," Dr. Mortimer remarked. "I searchedthis room carefully before lunch."
"And so did I," said Baskerville. "Every inch of it."
"There was certainly no boot in it then."
"In that case the waiter must have placed it there while we werelunching."
The German was sent for but professed to know nothing of the matter,nor could any inquiry clear it up. Another item had been added tothat constant and apparently purposeless series of small mysterieswhich had succeeded each other so rapidly. Setting aside the wholegrim story of Sir Charles's death, we had a line of inexplicableincidents all within the limits of two days, which included thereceipt of the printed letter, the black-bearded spy in the hansom,the loss of the new brown boot, the loss of the old black boot, andnow the return of the new brown boot. Holmes sat in silence in thecab as we drove back to Baker Street, and I knew from his drawn browsand keen face that his mind, like my own, was busy in endeavouring toframe some scheme into which all these strange and apparentlydisconnected episodes could be fitted. All afternoon and late intothe evening he sat lost in tobacco and thought.
Just before dinner two telegrams were handed in. The first ran:
Have just heard that Barrymore is at the Hall.Baskerville.
The second:
Visited twenty-three hotels as directed, but sorry to report unableto trace cut sheet of Times.Cartwright.
"There go two of my threads, Watson. There is nothing morestimulating than a case where everything goes against you. We mustcast round for another scent."
"We have still the cabman who drove the spy."
"Exactly. I have wired to get his name and address from the OfficialRegistry. I should not be surprised if this were an answer to myquestion."
The ring at the bell proved to be something even more satisfactorythan an answer, however, for the door opened and a rough-lookingfellow entered who was evidently the man himself.
"I got a message from the head office that a gent at this address hadbeen inquiring for 2704," said he. "I've driven my cab this sevenyears and never a word of complaint. I came here straight from theYard to ask you to your face what you had against me."
"I have nothing in the world against you, my good man," said Holmes."On the contrary, I have half a sovereign for you if you will give mea clear answer to my questions."
"Well, I've had a good day and no mistake," said the cabman, with agrin. "What was it you wanted to ask, sir?"
"First of all your name and address, in case I want you again."
"John Clayton, 3 Turpey Street, the Borough. My cab is out ofShipley's Yard, near Waterloo Station."
Sherlock Holmes made a note of it.
"Now, Clayton, tell me all about the fare who came and watched thishouse at ten o'clock this morning and afterwards followed the twogentlemen down Regent Street."
The man looked surprised and a little embarrassed. "Why, there's nogood my telling you things, for you seem to know as much as I doalready," said he. "The truth is that the gentleman told me that hewas a detective and that I was to say nothing about him to anyone."
"My good fellow, this is a very serious business, and you may findyourself in a pretty bad position if you try to hide anything fromme. You say that your fare told you that he was a detective?"
"Yes, he did."
"When did he say this?"
"When he left me."
"Did he say anything more?"
"He mentioned his name."
Holmes cast a swift glance of triumph at me. "Oh, he mentioned hisname, did he? That was imprudent. What was the name that hementioned?"
"His name," said the cabman, "was Mr. Sherlock Holmes."
Never have I seen my friend more completely taken aback than by thecabman's reply. For an instant he sat in silent amazement. Then heburst into a hearty laugh.
"A touch, Watson--an undeniable touch!" said he. "I feel a foil asquick and supple as my own. He got home upon me very prettily thattime. So his name was Sherlock Holmes, was it?"
"Yes, sir, that was the gentleman's name."
"Excellent! Tell me where you picked him up and all that occurred."
"He hailed me at half-past nine in Trafalgar Square. He said that hewas a detective, and he offered me two guineas if I would do exactlywhat he wanted all day and ask no questions. I was glad enough toagree. First we drove down to the Northumberland Hotel and waitedthere until two gentlemen came out and took a cab from the rank. Wefollowed their cab until it pulled up somewhere near here."
"This very door," said Holmes.
"Well, I couldn't be sure of that, but I dare say my fare knew allabout it. We pulled up half-way down the street and waited an hourand a half. Then the two gentlemen passed us, walking, and wefollowed down Baker Street and along--"
"I know," said Holmes.
"Until we got three-quarters down Regent Street. Then my gentlemanthrew up the trap, and he cried that I should drive right away toWaterloo Station as hard as I could go. I whipped up the mare and wewere there under the ten minutes. Then he paid up his two guineas,like a good one, and away he went into the station. Only just as hewas leaving he turned round and he said: 'It might interest you toknow that you have been driving Mr. Sherlock Holmes.' That's how Icome to know the name."
"I see. And you saw no more of him?"
"Not after he went into the station."
"And how would you describe Mr. Sherlock Holmes?"
The cabman scratched his head. "Well, he wasn't altogether such aneasy gentleman to describe. I'd put him at forty years of age, and hewas of a middle height, two or three inches shorter than you, sir. Hewas dressed like a toff, and he had a black beard, cut square at theend, and a pale face. I don't know as I could say more than that."
"Colour of his eyes?"
"No, I can't say that."
"Nothing more that you can remember?"
"No, sir; nothing."
"Well, then, here is your half-sovereign. There's another one waitingfor you if you can bring any more information. Good night!"
"Good night, sir, and thank you!"
John Clayton departed chuckling, and Holmes turned to me with a shrugof his shoulders and a rueful smile.
"Snap goes our third thread, and we end where we began," said he."The cunning rascal! He knew our number, knew that Sir HenryBaskerville had consulted me, spotted who I was in Regent Street,conjectured that I had got the number of the cab and would lay myhands on the driver, and so sent back this audacious message. I tellyou, Watson, this time we have got a foeman who is worthy of oursteel. I've been checkmated in London. I can only wish you betterluck in Devonshire. But I'm not easy in my mind about it."
"About what?"
"About sending you. It's an ugly business, Watson, an ugly dangerousbusiness, and the more I see of it the less I like it. Yes, my dearfellow, you may laugh, but I give you my word that I shall be veryglad to have you back safe and sound in Baker Street once more."




     CHAPTER VI     Baskerville Hall

Sir Henry Baskerville and Dr. Mortimer were ready upon the appointedday, and we started as arranged for Devonshire. Mr. Sherlock Holmesdrove with me to the station and gave me his last parting injunctionsand advice.
"I will not bias your mind by suggesting theories or suspicions,Watson," said he; "I wish you simply to report facts in the fullestpossible manner to me, and you can leave me to do the theorizing."
"What sort of facts?" I asked.
"Anything which may seem to have a bearing however indirect upon thecase, and especially the relations between young Baskerville and hisneighbours or any fresh particulars concerning the death of SirCharles. I have made some inquiries myself in the last few days, butthe results have, I fear, been negative. One thing only appears to becertain, and that is that Mr. James Desmond, who is the next heir, isan elderly gentleman of a very amiable disposition, so that thispersecution does not arise from him. I really think that we mayeliminate him entirely from our calculations. There remain the peoplewho will actually surround Sir Henry Baskerville upon the moor."
"Would it not be well in the first place to get rid of this Barrymorecouple?"
"By no means. You could not make a greater mistake. If they areinnocent it would be a cruel injustice, and if they are guilty weshould be giving up all chance of bringing it home to them. No, no,we will preserve them upon our list of suspects. Then there is agroom at the Hall, if I remember right. There are two moorlandfarmers. There is our friend Dr. Mortimer, whom I believe to beentirely honest, and there is his wife, of whom we know nothing.There is this naturalist, Stapleton, and there is his sister, who issaid to be a young lady of attractions. There is Mr. Frankland, ofLafter Hall, who is also an unknown factor, and there are one or twoother neighbours. These are the folk who must be your very specialstudy."
"I will do my best."
"You have arms, I suppose?"
"Yes, I thought it as well to take them."
"Most certainly. Keep your revolver near you night and day, and neverrelax your precautions."
Our friends had already secured a first-class carriage and werewaiting for us upon the platform.
"No, we have no news of any kind," said Dr. Mortimer in answer to myfriend's questions. "I can swear to one thing, and that is that wehave not been shadowed during the last two days. We have never goneout without keeping a sharp watch, and no one could have escaped ournotice."
"You have always kept together, I presume?"
"Except yesterday afternoon. I usually give up one day to pureamusement when I come to town, so I spent it at the Museum of theCollege of Surgeons."
"And I went to look at the folk in the park," said Baskerville. "Butwe had no trouble of any kind."
"It was imprudent, all the same," said Holmes, shaking his head andlooking very grave. "I beg, Sir Henry, that you will not go aboutalone. Some great misfortune will befall you if you do. Did you getyour other boot?"
"No, sir, it is gone forever."
"Indeed. That is very interesting. Well, good-bye," he added as thetrain began to glide down the platform. "Bear in mind, Sir Henry, oneof the phrases in that queer old legend which Dr. Mortimer has readto us, and avoid the moor in those hours of darkness when the powersof evil are exalted."
I looked back at the platform when we had left it far behind, and sawthe tall, austere figure of Holmes standing motionless and gazingafter us.
The journey was a swift and pleasant one, and I spent it in makingthe more intimate acquaintance of my two companions and in playingwith Dr. Mortimer's spaniel. In a very few hours the brown earth hadbecome ruddy, the brick had changed to granite, and red cows grazedin well-hedged fields where the lush grasses and more luxuriantvegetation spoke of a richer, if a damper, climate. Young Baskervillestared eagerly out of the window, and cried aloud with delight as herecognized the familiar features of the Devon scenery.
"I've been over a good part of the world since I left it, Dr.Watson," said he; "but I have never seen a place to compare with it."
"I never saw a Devonshire man who did not swear by his county," Iremarked.
"It depends upon the breed of men quite as much as on the county,"said Dr. Mortimer. "A glance at our friend here reveals the roundedhead of the Celt, which carries inside it the Celtic enthusiasm andpower of attachment. Poor Sir Charles's head was of a very rare type,half Gaelic, half Ivernian in its characteristics. But you were veryyoung when you last saw Baskerville Hall, were you not?"
"I was a boy in my 'teens at the time of my father's death, and hadnever seen the Hall, for he lived in a little cottage on the SouthCoast. Thence I went straight to a friend in America. I tell you itis all as new to me as it is to Dr. Watson, and I'm as keen aspossible to see the moor."
"Are you? Then your wish is easily granted, for there is your firstsight of the moor," said Dr. Mortimer, pointing out of the carriagewindow.
Over the green squares of the fields and the low curve of a woodthere rose in the distance a gray, melancholy hill, with a strangejagged summit, dim and vague in the distance, like some fantasticlandscape in a dream. Baskerville sat for a long time, his eyes fixedupon it, and I read upon his eager face how much it meant to him,this first sight of that strange spot where the men of his blood hadheld sway so long and left their mark so deep. There he sat, with histweed suit and his American accent, in the corner of a prosaicrailway-carriage, and yet as I looked at his dark and expressive faceI felt more than ever how true a descendant he was of that long lineof high-blooded, fiery, and masterful men. There were pride, valour,and strength in his thick brows, his sensitive nostrils, and hislarge hazel eyes. If on that forbidding moor a difficult anddangerous quest should lie before us, this was at least a comrade forwhom one might venture to take a risk with the certainty that hewould bravely share it.
The train pulled up at a small wayside station and we all descended.Outside, beyond the low, white fence, a wagonette with a pair of cobswas waiting. Our coming was evidently a great event, forstation-master and porters clustered round us to carry out ourluggage. It was a sweet, simple country spot, but I was surprised toobserve that by the gate there stood two soldierly men in darkuniforms, who leaned upon their short rifles and glanced keenly at usas we passed. The coachman, a hard-faced, gnarled little fellow,saluted Sir Henry Baskerville, and in a few minutes we were flyingswiftly down the broad, white road. Rolling pasture lands curvedupward on either side of us, and old gabled houses peeped out fromamid the thick green foliage, but behind the peaceful and sunlitcountry-side there rose ever, dark against the evening sky, the long,gloomy curve of the moor, broken by the jagged and sinister hills.
The wagonette swung round into a side road, and we curved upwardthrough deep lanes worn by centuries of wheels, high banks on eitherside, heavy with dripping moss and fleshy hart's-tongue ferns.Bronzing bracken and mottled bramble gleamed in the light of thesinking sun. Still steadily rising, we passed over a narrow granitebridge, and skirted a noisy stream which gushed swiftly down, foamingand roaring amid the gray boulders. Both road and stream wound upthrough a valley dense with scrub oak and fir. At every turnBaskerville gave an exclamation of delight, looking eagerly about himand asking countless questions. To his eyes all seemed beautiful, butto me a tinge of melancholy lay upon the country-side, which bore soclearly the mark of the waning year. Yellow leaves carpeted the lanesand fluttered down upon us as we passed. The rattle of our wheelsdied away as we drove through drifts of rotting vegetation--sadgifts, as it seemed to me, for Nature to throw before the carriage ofthe returning heir of the Baskervilles.
"Halloa!" cried Dr. Mortimer, "what is this?"
A steep curve of heath-clad land, an outlying spur of the moor, layin front of us. On the summit, hard and clear like an equestrianstatue upon its pedestal, was a mounted soldier, dark and stern, hisrifle poised ready over his forearm. He was watching the road alongwhich we travelled.
"What is this, Perkins?" asked Dr. Mortimer.
Our driver half turned in his seat.
"There's a convict escaped from Princetown, sir. He's been out threedays now, and the warders watch every road and every station, butthey've had no sight of him yet. The farmers about here don't likeit, sir, and that's a fact."
"Well, I understand that they get five pounds if they can giveinformation."
"Yes, sir, but the chance of five pounds is but a poor thing comparedto the chance of having your throat cut. You see, it isn't like anyordinary convict. This is a man that would stick at nothing."
"Who is he, then?"
"It is Selden, the Notting Hill murderer."
I remembered the case well, for it was one in which Holmes had takenan interest on account of the peculiar ferocity of the crime and thewanton brutality which had marked all the actions of the assassin.The commutation of his death sentence had been due to some doubts asto his complete sanity, so atrocious was his conduct. Our wagonettehad topped a rise and in front of us rose the huge expanse of themoor, mottled with gnarled and craggy cairns and tors. A cold windswept down from it and set us shivering. Somewhere there, on thatdesolate plain, was lurking this fiendish man, hiding in a burrowlike a wild beast, his heart full of malignancy against the wholerace which had cast him out. It needed but this to complete the grimsuggestiveness of the barren waste, the chilling wind, and thedarkling sky. Even Baskerville fell silent and pulled his overcoatmore closely around him.
We had left the fertile country behind and beneath us. We looked backon it now, the slanting rays of a low sun turning the streams tothreads of gold and glowing on the red earth new turned by the ploughand the broad tangle of the woodlands. The road in front of us grewbleaker and wilder over huge russet and olive slopes, sprinkled withgiant boulders. Now and then we passed a moorland cottage, walled androofed with stone, with no creeper to break its harsh outline.Suddenly we looked down into a cup-like depression, patched withstunted oaks and firs which had been twisted and bent by the fury ofyears of storm. Two high, narrow towers rose over the trees. Thedriver pointed with his whip.
"Baskerville Hall," said he.
Its master had risen and was staring with flushed cheeks and shiningeyes. A few minutes later we had reached the lodge-gates, a maze offantastic tracery in wrought iron, with weather-bitten pillars oneither side, blotched with lichens, and surmounted by the boars'heads of the Baskervilles. The lodge was a ruin of black granite andbared ribs of rafters, but facing it was a new building, halfconstructed, the first fruit of Sir Charles's South African gold.
Through the gateway we passed into the avenue, where the wheels wereagain hushed amid the leaves, and the old trees shot their branchesin a sombre tunnel over our heads. Baskerville shuddered as he lookedup the long, dark drive to where the house glimmered like a ghost atthe farther end.
"Was it here?" he asked in a low voice.
"No, no, the Yew Alley is on the other side."
The young heir glanced round with a gloomy face.
"It's no wonder my uncle felt as if trouble were coming on him insuch a place as this," said he. "It's enough to scare any man. I'llhave a row of electric lamps up here inside of six months, and youwon't know it again, with a thousand candle-power Swan and Edisonright here in front of the hall door."
The avenue opened into a broad expanse of turf, and the house laybefore us. In the fading light I could see that the centre was aheavy block of building from which a porch projected. The whole frontwas draped in ivy, with a patch clipped bare here and there where awindow or a coat-of-arms broke through the dark veil. From thiscentral block rose the twin towers, ancient, crenelated, and piercedwith many loopholes. To right and left of the turrets were moremodern wings of black granite. A dull light shone through heavymullioned windows, and from the high chimneys which rose from thesteep, high-angled roof there sprang a single black column of smoke.
"Welcome, Sir Henry! Welcome to Baskerville Hall!"
A tall man had stepped from the shadow of the porch to open the doorof the wagonette. The figure of a woman was silhouetted against theyellow light of the hall. She came out and helped the man to handdown our bags.
"You don't mind my driving straight home, Sir Henry?" said Dr.Mortimer. "My wife is expecting me."
"Surely you will stay and have some dinner?"
"No, I must go. I shall probably find some work awaiting me. I wouldstay to show you over the house, but Barrymore will be a better guidethan I. Good-bye, and never hesitate night or day to send for me if Ican be of service."
The wheels died away down the drive while Sir Henry and I turned intothe hall, and the door clanged heavily behind us. It was a fineapartment in which we found ourselves, large, lofty, and heavilyraftered with huge balks of age-blackened oak. In the greatold-fashioned fireplace behind the high iron dogs a log-fire crackledand snapped. Sir Henry and I held out our hands to it, for we werenumb from our long drive. Then we gazed round us at the high, thinwindow of old stained glass, the oak panelling, the stags' heads, thecoats-of-arms upon the walls, all dim and sombre in the subdued lightof the central lamp.
"It's just as I imagined it," said Sir Henry. "Is it not the verypicture of an old family home? To think that this should be the samehall in which for five hundred years my people have lived. It strikesme solemn to think of it."
I saw his dark face lit up with a boyish enthusiasm as he gazed abouthim. The light beat upon him where he stood, but long shadows traileddown the walls and hung like a black canopy above him. Barrymore hadreturned from taking our luggage to our rooms. He stood in front ofus now with the subdued manner of a well-trained servant. He was aremarkable-looking man, tall, handsome, with a square black beard andpale, distinguished features.
"Would you wish dinner to be served at once, sir?"
"Is it ready?"
"In a very few minutes, sir. You will find hot water in your rooms.My wife and I will be happy, Sir Henry, to stay with you until youhave made your fresh arrangements, but you will understand that underthe new conditions this house will require a considerable staff."
"What new conditions?"
"I only meant, sir, that Sir Charles led a very retired life, and wewere able to look after his wants. You would, naturally, wish to havemore company, and so you will need changes in your household."
"Do you mean that your wife and you wish to leave?"
"Only when it is quite convenient to you, sir."
"But your family have been with us for several generations, have theynot? I should be sorry to begin my life here by breaking an oldfamily connection."
I seemed to discern some signs of emotion upon the butler's whiteface.
"I feel that also, sir, and so does my wife. But to tell the truth,sir, we were both very much attached to Sir Charles, and his deathgave us a shock and made these surroundings very painful to us. Ifear that we shall never again be easy in our minds at BaskervilleHall."
"But what do you intend to do?"
"I have no doubt, sir, that we shall succeed in establishingourselves in some business. Sir Charles's generosity has given us themeans to do so. And now, sir, perhaps I had best show you to yourrooms."
A square balustraded gallery ran round the top of the old hall,approached by a double stair. From this central point two longcorridors extended the whole length of the building, from which allthe bedrooms opened. My own was in the same wing as Baskerville's andalmost next door to it. These rooms appeared to be much more modernthan the central part of the house, and the bright paper and numerouscandles did something to remove the sombre impression which ourarrival had left upon my mind.
But the dining-room which opened out of the hall was a place ofshadow and gloom. It was a long chamber with a step separating thedais where the family sat from the lower portion reserved for theirdependents. At one end a minstrel's gallery overlooked it. Blackbeams shot across above our heads, with a smoke-darkened ceilingbeyond them. With rows of flaring torches to light it up, and thecolour and rude hilarity of an old-time banquet, it might havesoftened; but now, when two black-clothed gentlemen sat in the littlecircle of light thrown by a shaded lamp, one's voice became hushedand one's spirit subdued. A dim line of ancestors, in every varietyof dress, from the Elizabethan knight to the buck of the Regency,stared down upon us and daunted us by their silent company. We talkedlittle, and I for one was glad when the meal was over and we wereable to retire into the modern billiard-room and smoke a cigarette.
"My word, it isn't a very cheerful place," said Sir Henry. "I supposeone can tone down to it, but I feel a bit out of the picture atpresent. I don't wonder that my uncle got a little jumpy if he livedall alone in such a house as this. However, if it suits you, we willretire early to-night, and perhaps things may seem more cheerful inthe morning."
I drew aside my curtains before I went to bed and looked out from mywindow. It opened upon the grassy space which lay in front of thehall door. Beyond, two copses of trees moaned and swung in a risingwind. A half moon broke through the rifts of racing clouds. In itscold light I saw beyond the trees a broken fringe of rocks, and thelong, low curve of the melancholy moor. I closed the curtain, feelingthat my last impression was in keeping with the rest.
And yet it was not quite the last. I found myself weary and yetwakeful, tossing restlessly from side to side, seeking for the sleepwhich would not come. Far away a chiming clock struck out thequarters of the hours, but otherwise a deathly silence lay upon theold house. And then suddenly, in the very dead of the night, therecame a sound to my ears, clear, resonant, and unmistakable. It wasthe sob of a woman, the muffled, strangling gasp of one who is tornby an uncontrollable sorrow. I sat up in bed and listened intently.The noise could not have been far away and was certainly in thehouse. For half an hour I waited with every nerve on the alert, butthere came no other sound save the chiming clock and the rustle ofthe ivy on the wall.




     CHAPTER VII     The Stapletons of Merripit House

The fresh beauty of the following morning did something to effacefrom our minds the grim and gray impression which had been left uponboth of us by our first experience of Baskerville Hall. As Sir Henryand I sat at breakfast the sunlight flooded in through the highmullioned windows, throwing watery patches of colour from the coatsof arms which covered them. The dark panelling glowed like bronze inthe golden rays, and it was hard to realize that this was indeed thechamber which had struck such a gloom into our souls upon the eveningbefore.
"I guess it is ourselves and not the house that we have to blame!"said the baronet. "We were tired with our journey and chilled by ourdrive, so we took a gray view of the place. Now we are fresh andwell, so it is all cheerful once more."
"And yet it was not entirely a question of imagination," I answered."Did you, for example, happen to hear someone, a woman I think,sobbing in the night?"
"That is curious, for I did when I was half asleep fancy that I heardsomething of the sort. I waited quite a time, but there was no moreof it, so I concluded that it was all a dream."
"I heard it distinctly, and I am sure that it was really the sob of awoman."
"We must ask about this right away." He rang the bell and askedBarrymore whether he could account for our experience. It seemed tome that the pallid features of the butler turned a shade paler stillas he listened to his master's question.
"There are only two women in the house, Sir Henry," he answered. "Oneis the scullery-maid, who sleeps in the other wing. The other is mywife, and I can answer for it that the sound could not have come fromher."
And yet he lied as he said it, for it chanced that after breakfast Imet Mrs. Barrymore in the long corridor with the sun full upon herface. She was a large, impassive, heavy-featured woman with a sternset expression of mouth. But her tell-tale eyes were red and glancedat me from between swollen lids. It was she, then, who wept in thenight, and if she did so her husband must know it. Yet he had takenthe obvious risk of discovery in declaring that it was not so. Whyhad he done this? And why did she weep so bitterly? Already roundthis pale-faced, handsome, black-bearded man there was gathering anatmosphere of mystery and of gloom. It was he who had been the firstto discover the body of Sir Charles, and we had only his word for allthe circumstances which led up to the old man's death. Was itpossible that it was Barrymore after all whom we had seen in the cabin Regent Street? The beard might well have been the same. The cabmanhad described a somewhat shorter man, but such an impression mighteasily have been erroneous. How could I settle the point forever?Obviously the first thing to do was to see the Grimpen postmaster,and find whether the test telegram had really been placed inBarrymore's own hands. Be the answer what it might, I should at leasthave something to report to Sherlock Holmes.
Sir Henry had numerous papers to examine after breakfast, so that thetime was propitious for my excursion. It was a pleasant walk of fourmiles along the edge of the moor, leading me at last to a small grayhamlet, in which two larger buildings, which proved to be the inn andthe house of Dr. Mortimer, stood high above the rest. The postmaster,who was also the village grocer, had a clear recollection of thetelegram.
"Certainly, sir," said he, "I had the telegram delivered to Mr.Barrymore exactly as directed."
"Who delivered it?"
"My boy here. James, you delivered that telegram to Mr. Barrymore atthe Hall last week, did you not?"
"Yes, father, I delivered it."
"Into his own hands?" I asked.
"Well, he was up in the loft at the time, so that I could not put itinto his own hands, but I gave it into Mrs. Barrymore's hands, andshe promised to deliver it at once."
"Did you see Mr. Barrymore?"
"No, sir; I tell you he was in the loft."
"If you didn't see him, how do you know he was in the loft?"
"Well, surely his own wife ought to know where he is," said thepostmaster testily. "Didn't he get the telegram? If there is anymistake it is for Mr. Barrymore himself to complain."
It seemed hopeless to pursue the inquiry any farther, but it wasclear that in spite of Holmes's ruse we had no proof that Barrymorehad not been in London all the time. Suppose that it were so--supposethat the same man had been the last who had seen Sir Charles alive,and the first to dog the new heir when he returned to England. Whatthen? Was he the agent of others or had he some sinister design ofhis own? What interest could he have in persecuting the Baskervillefamily? I thought of the strange warning clipped out of the leadingarticle of the Times. Was that his work or was it possibly the doingof someone who was bent upon counteracting his schemes? The onlyconceivable motive was that which had been suggested by Sir Henry,that if the family could be scared away a comfortable and permanenthome would be secured for the Barrymores. But surely such anexplanation as that would be quite inadequate to account for the deepand subtle scheming which seemed to be weaving an invisible net roundthe young baronet. Holmes himself had said that no more complex casehad come to him in all the long series of his sensationalinvestigations. I prayed, as I walked back along the gray, lonelyroad, that my friend might soon be freed from his preoccupations andable to come down to take this heavy burden of responsibility from myshoulders.
Suddenly my thoughts were interrupted by the sound of running feetbehind me and by a voice which called me by name. I turned, expectingto see Dr. Mortimer, but to my surprise it was a stranger who waspursuing me. He was a small, slim, clean-shaven, prim-faced man,flaxen-haired and lean-jawed, between thirty and forty years of age,dressed in a gray suit and wearing a straw hat. A tin box forbotanical specimens hung over his shoulder and he carried a greenbutterfly-net in one of his hands.
"You will, I am sure, excuse my presumption, Dr. Watson," said he, ashe came panting up to where I stood. "Here on the moor we are homelyfolk and do not wait for formal introductions. You may possibly haveheard my name from our mutual friend, Mortimer. I am Stapleton, ofMerripit House."
"Your net and box would have told me as much," said I, "for I knewthat Mr. Stapleton was a naturalist. But how did you know me?"
"I have been calling on Mortimer, and he pointed you out to me fromthe window of his surgery as you passed. As our road lay the same wayI thought that I would overtake you and introduce myself. I trustthat Sir Henry is none the worse for his journey?"
"He is very well, thank you."
"We were all rather afraid that after the sad death of Sir Charlesthe new baronet might refuse to live here. It is asking much of awealthy man to come down and bury himself in a place of this kind,but I need not tell you that it means a very great deal to thecountry-side. Sir Henry has, I suppose, no superstitious fears in thematter?"
"I do not think that it is likely."
"Of course you know the legend of the fiend dog which haunts thefamily?"
"I have heard it."
"It is extraordinary how credulous the peasants are about here! Anynumber of them are ready to swear that they have seen such a creatureupon the moor." He spoke with a smile, but I seemed to read in hiseyes that he took the matter more seriously. "The story took a greathold upon the imagination of Sir Charles, and I have no doubt that itled to his tragic end."
"But how?"
"His nerves were so worked up that the appearance of any dog mighthave had a fatal effect upon his diseased heart. I fancy that hereally did see something of the kind upon that last night in the YewAlley. I feared that some disaster might occur, for I was very fondof the old man, and I knew that his heart was weak."
"How did you know that?"
"My friend Mortimer told me."
"You think, then, that some dog pursued Sir Charles, and that he diedof fright in consequence?"
"Have you any better explanation?"
"I have not come to any conclusion."
"Has Mr. Sherlock Holmes?"
The words took away my breath for an instant, but a glance at theplacid face and steadfast eyes of my companion showed that nosurprise was intended.
"It is useless for us to pretend that we do not know you, Dr.Watson," said he. "The records of your detective have reached ushere, and you could not celebrate him without being known yourself.When Mortimer told me your name he could not deny your identity. Ifyou are here, then it follows that Mr. Sherlock Holmes is interestinghimself in the matter, and I am naturally curious to know what viewhe may take."
"I am afraid that I cannot answer that question."
"May I ask if he is going to honour us with a visit himself?"
"He cannot leave town at present. He has other cases which engage hisattention."
"What a pity! He might throw some light on that which is so dark tous. But as to your own researches, if there is any possible way inwhich I can be of service to you I trust that you will command me. IfI had any indication of the nature of your suspicions or how youpropose to investigate the case, I might perhaps even now give yousome aid or advice."
"I assure you that I am simply here upon a visit to my friend, SirHenry, and that I need no help of any kind."
"Excellent!" said Stapleton. "You are perfectly right to be wary anddiscreet. I am justly reproved for what I feel was an unjustifiableintrusion, and I promise you that I will not mention the matteragain."
We had come to a point where a narrow grassy path struck off from theroad and wound away across the moor. A steep, boulder-sprinkled hilllay upon the right which had in bygone days been cut into a granitequarry. The face which was turned towards us formed a dark cliff,with ferns and brambles growing in its niches. From over a distantrise there floated a gray plume of smoke.
"A moderate walk along this moor-path brings us to Merripit House,"said he. "Perhaps you will spare an hour that I may have the pleasureof introducing you to my sister."
My first thought was that I should be by Sir Henry's side. But then Iremembered the pile of papers and bills with which his study tablewas littered. It was certain that I could not help with those. AndHolmes had expressly said that I should study the neighbours upon themoor. I accepted Stapleton's invitation, and we turned together downthe path.
"It is a wonderful place, the moor," said he, looking round over theundulating downs, long green rollers, with crests of jagged granitefoaming up into fantastic surges. "You never tire of the moor. Youcannot think the wonderful secrets which it contains. It is so vast,and so barren, and so mysterious."
"You know it well, then?"
"I have only been here two years. The residents would call me anewcomer. We came shortly after Sir Charles settled. But my tastesled me to explore every part of the country round, and I should thinkthat there are few men who know it better than I do."
"Is it hard to know?"
"Very hard. You see, for example, this great plain to the north herewith the queer hills breaking out of it. Do you observe anythingremarkable about that?"
"It would be a rare place for a gallop."
"You would naturally think so and the thought has cost several theirlives before now. You notice those bright green spots scatteredthickly over it?"
"Yes, they seem more fertile than the rest."
Stapleton laughed.
"That is the great Grimpen Mire," said he. "A false step yonder meansdeath to man or beast. Only yesterday I saw one of the moor ponieswander into it. He never came out. I saw his head for quite a longtime craning out of the bog-hole, but it sucked him down at last.Even in dry seasons it is a danger to cross it, but after theseautumn rains it is an awful place. And yet I can find my way to thevery heart of it and return alive. By George, there is another ofthose miserable ponies!"
Something brown was rolling and tossing among the green sedges. Thena long, agonized, writhing neck shot upward and a dreadful cry echoedover the moor. It turned me cold with horror, but my companion'snerves seemed to be stronger than mine.
"It's gone!" said he. "The mire has him. Two in two days, and manymore, perhaps, for they get in the way of going there in the dryweather, and never know the difference until the mire has them in itsclutches. It's a bad place, the great Grimpen Mire."
"And you say you can penetrate it?"
"Yes, there are one or two paths which a very active man can take. Ihave found them out."
"But why should you wish to go into so horrible a place?"
"Well, you see the hills beyond? They are really islands cut off onall sides by the impassable mire, which has crawled round them in thecourse of years. That is where the rare plants and the butterfliesare, if you have the wit to reach them."
"I shall try my luck some day."
He looked at me with a surprised face.
"For God's sake put such an idea out of your mind," said he. "Yourblood would be upon my head. I assure you that there would not be theleast chance of your coming back alive. It is only by rememberingcertain complex landmarks that I am able to do it."
"Halloa!" I cried. "What is that?"
A long, low moan, indescribably sad, swept over the moor. It filledthe whole air, and yet it was impossible to say whence it came. Froma dull murmur it swelled into a deep roar, and then sank back into amelancholy, throbbing murmur once again. Stapleton looked at me witha curious expression in his face.
"Queer place, the moor!" said he.
"But what is it?"
"The peasants say it is the Hound of the Baskervilles calling for itsprey. I've heard it once or twice before, but never quite so loud."
I looked round, with a chill of fear in my heart, at the hugeswelling plain, mottled with the green patches of rushes. Nothingstirred over the vast expanse save a pair of ravens, which croakedloudly from a tor behind us.
"You are an educated man. You don't believe such nonsense as that?"said I. "What do you think is the cause of so strange a sound?"
"Bogs make queer noises sometimes. It's the mud settling, or thewater rising, or something."
"No, no, that was a living voice."
"Well, perhaps it was. Did you ever hear a bittern booming?"
"No, I never did."
"It's a very rare bird--practically extinct--in England now, but allthings are possible upon the moor. Yes, I should not be surprised tolearn that what we have heard is the cry of the last of thebitterns."
"It's the weirdest, strangest thing that ever I heard in my life."
"Yes, it's rather an uncanny place altogether. Look at the hill-sideyonder. What do you make of those?"
The whole steep slope was covered with gray circular rings of stone,a score of them at least.
"What are they? Sheep-pens?"
"No, they are the homes of our worthy ancestors. Prehistoric manlived thickly on the moor, and as no one in particular has livedthere since, we find all his little arrangements exactly as he leftthem. These are his wigwams with the roofs off. You can even see hishearth and his couch if you have the curiosity to go inside."
"But it is quite a town. When was it inhabited?"
"Neolithic man--no date."
"What did he do?"
"He grazed his cattle on these slopes, and he learned to dig for tinwhen the bronze sword began to supersede the stone axe. Look at thegreat trench in the opposite hill. That is his mark. Yes, you willfind some very singular points about the moor, Dr. Watson. Oh, excuseme an instant! It is surely Cyclopides."
A small fly or moth had fluttered across our path, and in an instantStapleton was rushing with extraordinary energy and speed in pursuitof it. To my dismay the creature flew straight for the great mire,and my acquaintance never paused for an instant, bounding from tuftto tuft behind it, his green net waving in the air. His gray clothesand jerky, zigzag, irregular progress made him not unlike some hugemoth himself. I was standing watching his pursuit with a mixture ofadmiration for his extraordinary activity and fear lest he shouldlose his footing in the treacherous mire, when I heard the sound ofsteps, and turning round found a woman near me upon the path. She hadcome from the direction in which the plume of smoke indicated theposition of Merripit House, but the dip of the moor had hid her untilshe was quite close.
I could not doubt that this was the Miss Stapleton of whom I had beentold, since ladies of any sort must be few upon the moor, and Iremembered that I had heard someone describe her as being a beauty.The woman who approached me was certainly that, and of a mostuncommon type. There could not have been a greater contrast betweenbrother and sister, for Stapleton was neutral tinted, with light hairand gray eyes, while she was darker than any brunette whom I haveseen in England--slim, elegant, and tall. She had a proud, finely cutface, so regular that it might have seemed impassive were it not forthe sensitive mouth and the beautiful dark, eager eyes. With herperfect figure and elegant dress she was, indeed, a strangeapparition upon a lonely moorland path. Her eyes were on her brotheras I turned, and then she quickened her pace towards me. I had raisedmy hat and was about to make some explanatory remark, when her ownwords turned all my thoughts into a new channel.
"Go back!" she said. "Go straight back to London, instantly."
I could only stare at her in stupid surprise. Her eyes blazed at me,and she tapped the ground impatiently with her foot.
"Why should I go back?" I asked.
"I cannot explain." She spoke in a low, eager voice, with a curiouslisp in her utterance. "But for God's sake do what I ask you. Go backand never set foot upon the moor again."
"But I have only just come."
"Man, man!" she cried. "Can you not tell when a warning is for yourown good? Go back to London! Start to-night! Get away from this placeat all costs! Hush, my brother is coming! Not a word of what I havesaid. Would you mind getting that orchid for me among the mares-tailsyonder? We are very rich in orchids on the moor, though, of course,you are rather late to see the beauties of the place."
Stapleton had abandoned the chase and came back to us breathing hardand flushed with his exertions.
"Halloa, Beryl!" said he, and it seemed to me that the tone of hisgreeting was not altogether a cordial one.
"Well, Jack, you are very hot."
"Yes, I was chasing a Cyclopides. He is very rare and seldom found inthe late autumn. What a pity that I should have missed him!" He spokeunconcernedly, but his small light eyes glanced incessantly from thegirl to me.
"You have introduced yourselves, I can see."
"Yes. I was telling Sir Henry that it was rather late for him to seethe true beauties of the moor."
"Why, who do you think this is?"
"I imagine that it must be Sir Henry Baskerville."
"No, no," said I. "Only a humble commoner, but his friend. My name isDr. Watson."
A flush of vexation passed over her expressive face. "We have beentalking at cross purposes," said she.
"Why, you had not very much time for talk," her brother remarked withthe same questioning eyes.
"I talked as if Dr. Watson were a resident instead of being merely avisitor," said she. "It cannot much matter to him whether it is earlyor late for the orchids. But you will come on, will you not, and seeMerripit House?"
A short walk brought us to it, a bleak moorland house, once the farmof some grazier in the old prosperous days, but now put into repairand turned into a modern dwelling. An orchard surrounded it, but thetrees, as is usual upon the moor, were stunted and nipped, and theeffect of the whole place was mean and melancholy. We were admittedby a strange, wizened, rusty-coated old manservant, who seemed inkeeping with the house. Inside, however, there were large roomsfurnished with an elegance in which I seemed to recognize the tasteof the lady. As I looked from their windows at the interminablegranite-flecked moor rolling unbroken to the farthest horizon I couldnot but marvel at what could have brought this highly educated manand this beautiful woman to live in such a place.
"Queer spot to choose, is it not?" said he as if in answer to mythought. "And yet we manage to make ourselves fairly happy, do wenot, Beryl?"
"Quite happy," said she, but there was no ring of conviction in herwords.
"I had a school," said Stapleton. "It was in the north country. Thework to a man of my temperament was mechanical and uninteresting, butthe privilege of living with youth, of helping to mould those youngminds, and of impressing them with one's own character and ideals,was very dear to me. However, the fates were against us. A seriousepidemic broke out in the school and three of the boys died. It neverrecovered from the blow, and much of my capital was irretrievablyswallowed up. And yet, if it were not for the loss of the charmingcompanionship of the boys, I could rejoice over my own misfortune,for, with my strong tastes for botany and zoology, I find anunlimited field of work here, and my sister is as devoted to Natureas I am. All this, Dr. Watson, has been brought upon your head byyour expression as you surveyed the moor out of our window."
"It certainly did cross my mind that it might be a little dull--lessfor you, perhaps, than for your sister."
"No, no, I am never dull," said she, quickly.
"We have books, we have our studies, and we have interestingneighbours. Dr. Mortimer is a most learned man in his own line. PoorSir Charles was also an admirable companion. We knew him well, andmiss him more than I can tell. Do you think that I should intrude ifI were to call this afternoon and make the acquaintance of SirHenry?"
"I am sure that he would be delighted."
"Then perhaps you would mention that I propose to do so. We may inour humble way do something to make things more easy for him until hebecomes accustomed to his new surroundings. Will you come upstairs,Dr. Watson, and inspect my collection of Lepidoptera? I think it isthe most complete one in the south-west of England. By the time thatyou have looked through them lunch will be almost ready."
But I was eager to get back to my charge. The melancholy of the moor,the death of the unfortunate pony, the weird sound which had beenassociated with the grim legend of the Baskervilles, all these thingstinged my thoughts with sadness. Then on the top of these more orless vague impressions there had come the definite and distinctwarning of Miss Stapleton, delivered with such intense earnestnessthat I could not doubt that some grave and deep reason lay behind it.I resisted all pressure to stay for lunch, and I set off at once uponmy return journey, taking the grass-grown path by which we had come.
It seems, however, that there must have been some short cut for thosewho knew it, for before I had reached the road I was astounded to seeMiss Stapleton sitting upon a rock by the side of the track. Her facewas beautifully flushed with her exertions, and she held her hand toher side.
"I have run all the way in order to cut you off, Dr. Watson," saidshe. "I had not even time to put on my hat. I must not stop, or mybrother may miss me. I wanted to say to you how sorry I am about thestupid mistake I made in thinking that you were Sir Henry. Pleaseforget the words I said, which have no application whatever to you."
"But I can't forget them, Miss Stapleton," said I. "I am Sir Henry'sfriend, and his welfare is a very close concern of mine. Tell me whyit was that you were so eager that Sir Henry should return toLondon."
"A woman's whim, Dr. Watson. When you know me better you willunderstand that I cannot always give reasons for what I say or do."
"No, no. I remember the thrill in your voice. I remember the look inyour eyes. Please, please, be frank with me, Miss Stapleton, for eversince I have been here I have been conscious of shadows all round me.Life has become like that great Grimpen Mire, with little greenpatches everywhere into which one may sink and with no guide to pointthe track. Tell me then what it was that you meant, and I willpromise to convey your warning to Sir Henry."
An expression of irresolution passed for an instant over her face,but her eyes had hardened again when she answered me.
"You make too much of it, Dr. Watson," said she. "My brother and Iwere very much shocked by the death of Sir Charles. We knew him veryintimately, for his favourite walk was over the moor to our house. Hewas deeply impressed with the curse which hung over the family, andwhen this tragedy came I naturally felt that there must be somegrounds for the fears which he had expressed. I was distressedtherefore when another member of the family came down to live here,and I felt that he should be warned of the danger which he will run.That was all which I intended to convey.
"But what is the danger?"
"You know the story of the hound?"
"I do not believe in such nonsense."
"But I do. If you have any influence with Sir Henry, take him awayfrom a place which has always been fatal to his family. The world iswide. Why should he wish to live at the place of danger?"
"Because it is the place of danger. That is Sir Henry's nature. Ifear that unless you can give me some more definite information thanthis it would be impossible to get him to move."
"I cannot say anything definite, for I do not know anythingdefinite."
"I would ask you one more question, Miss Stapleton. If you meant nomore than this when you first spoke to me, why should you not wishyour brother to overhear what you said? There is nothing to which he,or anyone else, could object."
"My brother is very anxious to have the Hall inhabited, for he thinksit is for the good of the poor folk upon the moor. He would be veryangry if he knew that I have said anything which might induce SirHenry to go away. But I have done my duty now and I will say no more.I must get back, or he will miss me and suspect that I have seen you.Good-bye!" She turned and had disappeared in a few minutes among thescattered boulders, while I, with my soul full of vague fears,pursued my way to Baskerville Hall.




     CHAPTER VIII     First Report of Dr. Watson

From this point onward I will follow the course of events bytranscribing my own letters to Mr. Sherlock Holmes which lie beforeme on the table. One page is missing, but otherwise they are exactlyas written and show my feelings and suspicions of the moment moreaccurately than my memory, clear as it is upon these tragic events,can possibly do.
Baskerville Hall, October 13th.
My dear Holmes:My previous letters and telegrams have kept you pretty well up todate as to all that has occurred in this most God-forsaken corner ofthe world. The longer one stays here the more does the spirit of themoor sink into one's soul, its vastness, and also its grim charm.When you are once out upon its bosom you have left all traces ofmodern England behind you, but on the other hand you are consciouseverywhere of the homes and the work of the prehistoric people. Onall sides of you as you walk are the houses of these forgotten folk,with their graves and the huge monoliths which are supposed to havemarked their temples. As you look at their gray stone huts againstthe scarred hill-sides you leave your own age behind you, and if youwere to see a skin-clad, hairy man crawl out from the low doorfitting a flint-tipped arrow on to the string of his bow, you wouldfeel that his presence there was more natural than your own. Thestrange thing is that they should have lived so thickly on what mustalways have been most unfruitful soil. I am no antiquarian, but Icould imagine that they were some unwarlike and harried race who wereforced to accept that which none other would occupy.
All this, however, is foreign to the mission on which you sent me andwill probably be very uninteresting to your severely practical mind.I can still remember your complete indifference as to whether the sunmoved round the earth or the earth round the sun. Let me, therefore,return to the facts concerning Sir Henry Baskerville.
If you have not had any report within the last few days it is becauseup to to-day there was nothing of importance to relate. Then a verysurprising circumstance occurred, which I shall tell you in duecourse. But, first of all, I must keep you in touch with some of theother factors in the situation.
One of these, concerning which I have said little, is the escapedconvict upon the moor. There is strong reason now to believe that hehas got right away, which is a considerable relief to the lonelyhouseholders of this district. A fortnight has passed since hisflight, during which he has not been seen and nothing has been heardof him. It is surely inconceivable that he could have held out uponthe moor during all that time. Of course, so far as his concealmentgoes there is no difficulty at all. Any one of these stone huts wouldgive him a hiding-place. But there is nothing to eat unless he wereto catch and slaughter one of the moor sheep. We think, therefore,that he has gone, and the outlying farmers sleep the better inconsequence.
We are four able-bodied men in this household, so that we could takegood care of ourselves, but I confess that I have had uneasy momentswhen I have thought of the Stapletons. They live miles from any help.There are one maid, an old manservant, the sister, and the brother,the latter not a very strong man. They would be helpless in the handsof a desperate fellow like this Notting Hill criminal, if he couldonce effect an entrance. Both Sir Henry and I were concerned at theirsituation, and it was suggested that Perkins the groom should go overto sleep there, but Stapleton would not hear of it.
The fact is that our friend, the baronet, begins to display aconsiderable interest in our fair neighbour. It is not to be wonderedat, for time hangs heavily in this lonely spot to an active man likehim, and she is a very fascinating and beautiful woman. There issomething tropical and exotic about her which forms a singularcontrast to her cool and unemotional brother. Yet he also gives theidea of hidden fires. He has certainly a very marked influence overher, for I have seen her continually glance at him as she talked asif seeking approbation for what she said. I trust that he is kind toher. There is a dry glitter in his eyes, and a firm set of his thinlips, which goes with a positive and possibly a harsh nature. Youwould find him an interesting study.
He came over to call upon Baskerville on that first day, and the verynext morning he took us both to show us the spot where the legend ofthe wicked Hugo is supposed to have had its origin. It was anexcursion of some miles across the moor to a place which is so dismalthat it might have suggested the story. We found a short valleybetween rugged tors which led to an open, grassy space flecked overwith the white cotton grass. In the middle of it rose two greatstones, worn and sharpened at the upper end, until they looked likethe huge corroding fangs of some monstrous beast. In every way itcorresponded with the scene of the old tragedy. Sir Henry was muchinterested and asked Stapleton more than once whether he did reallybelieve in the possibility of the interference of the supernatural inthe affairs of men. He spoke lightly, but it was evident that he wasvery much in earnest. Stapleton was guarded in his replies, but itwas easy to see that he said less than he might, and that he wouldnot express his whole opinion out of consideration for the feelingsof the baronet. He told us of similar cases, where families hadsuffered from some evil influence, and he left us with the impressionthat he shared the popular view upon the matter.
On our way back we stayed for lunch at Merripit House, and it wasthere that Sir Henry made the acquaintance of Miss Stapleton. Fromthe first moment that he saw her he appeared to be strongly attractedby her, and I am much mistaken if the feeling was not mutual. Hereferred to her again and again on our walk home, and since thenhardly a day has passed that we have not seen something of thebrother and sister. They dine here to-night, and there is some talkof our going to them next week. One would imagine that such a matchwould be very welcome to Stapleton, and yet I have more than oncecaught a look of the strongest disapprobation in his face when SirHenry has been paying some attention to his sister. He is muchattached to her, no doubt, and would lead a lonely life without her,but it would seem the height of selfishness if he were to stand inthe way of her making so brilliant a marriage. Yet I am certain thathe does not wish their intimacy to ripen into love, and I haveseveral times observed that he has taken pains to prevent them frombeing tte--tte. By the way, your instructions to me never to allowSir Henry to go out alone will become very much more onerous if alove affair were to be added to our other difficulties. My popularitywould soon suffer if I were to carry out your orders to the letter.
The other day--Thursday, to be more exact--Dr. Mortimer lunched withus. He has been excavating a barrow at Long Down, and has got aprehistoric skull which fills him with great joy. Never was theresuch a single-minded enthusiast as he! The Stapletons came inafterwards, and the good doctor took us all to the Yew Alley, at SirHenry's request, to show us exactly how everything occurred upon thatfatal night. It is a long, dismal walk, the Yew Alley, between twohigh walls of clipped hedge, with a narrow band of grass upon eitherside. At the far end is an old tumble-down summer-house. Half-waydown is the moor-gate, where the old gentleman left his cigar-ash. Itis a white wooden gate with a latch. Beyond it lies the wide moor. Iremembered your theory of the affair and tried to picture all thathad occurred. As the old man stood there he saw something comingacross the moor, something which terrified him so that he lost hiswits, and ran and ran until he died of sheer horror and exhaustion.There was the long, gloomy tunnel down which he fled. And from what?A sheep-dog of the moor? Or a spectral hound, black, silent, andmonstrous? Was there a human agency in the matter? Did the pale,watchful Barrymore know more than he cared to say? It was all dim andvague, but always there is the dark shadow of crime behind it.
One other neighbour I have met since I wrote last. This is Mr.Frankland, of Lafter Hall, who lives some four miles to the south ofus. He is an elderly man, red-faced, white-haired, and choleric. Hispassion is for the British law, and he has spent a large fortune inlitigation. He fights for the mere pleasure of fighting and isequally ready to take up either side of a question, so that it is nowonder that he has found it a costly amusement. Sometimes he willshut up a right of way and defy the parish to make him open it. Atothers he will with his own hands tear down some other man's gate anddeclare that a path has existed there from time immemorial, defyingthe owner to prosecute him for trespass. He is learned in oldmanorial and communal rights, and he applies his knowledge sometimesin favour of the villagers of Fernworthy and sometimes against them,so that he is periodically either carried in triumph down the villagestreet or else burned in effigy, according to his latest exploit. Heis said to have about seven lawsuits upon his hands at present, whichwill probably swallow up the remainder of his fortune and so draw hissting and leave him harmless for the future. Apart from the law heseems a kindly, good-natured person, and I only mention him becauseyou were particular that I should send some description of the peoplewho surround us. He is curiously employed at present, for, being anamateur astronomer, he has an excellent telescope, with which he liesupon the roof of his own house and sweeps the moor all day in thehope of catching a glimpse of the escaped convict. If he wouldconfine his energies to this all would be well, but there are rumoursthat he intends to prosecute Dr. Mortimer for opening a grave withoutthe consent of the next-of-kin, because he dug up the Neolithic skullin the barrow on Long Down. He helps to keep our lives from beingmonotonous and gives a little comic relief where it is badly needed.
And now, having brought you up to date in the escaped convict, theStapletons, Dr. Mortimer, and Frankland, of Lafter Hall, let me endon that which is most important and tell you more about theBarrymores, and especially about the surprising development of lastnight.
First of all about the test telegram, which you sent from London inorder to make sure that Barrymore was really here. I have alreadyexplained that the testimony of the postmaster shows that the testwas worthless and that we have no proof one way or the other. I toldSir Henry how the matter stood, and he at once, in his downrightfashion, had Barrymore up and asked him whether he had received thetelegram himself. Barrymore said that he had.
"Did the boy deliver it into your own hands?" asked Sir Henry.
Barrymore looked surprised, and considered for a little time.
"No," said he, "I was in the box-room at the time, and my wifebrought it up to me."
"Did you answer it yourself?"
"No; I told my wife what to answer and she went down to write it."
In the evening he recurred to the subject of his own accord.
"I could not quite understand the object of your questions thismorning, Sir Henry," said he. "I trust that they do not mean that Ihave done anything to forfeit your confidence?"
Sir Henry had to assure him that it was not so and pacify him bygiving him a considerable part of his old wardrobe, the London outfithaving now all arrived.
Mrs. Barrymore is of interest to me. She is a heavy, solid person,very limited, intensely respectable, and inclined to be puritanical.You could hardly conceive a less emotional subject. Yet I have toldyou how, on the first night here, I heard her sobbing bitterly, andsince then I have more than once observed traces of tears upon herface. Some deep sorrow gnaws ever at her heart. Sometimes I wonder ifshe has a guilty memory which haunts her, and sometimes I suspectBarrymore of being a domestic tyrant. I have always felt that therewas something singular and questionable in this man's character, butthe adventure of last night brings all my suspicions to a head.
And yet it may seem a small matter in itself. You are aware that I amnot a very sound sleeper, and since I have been on guard in thishouse my slumbers have been lighter than ever. Last night, about twoin the morning, I was aroused by a stealthy step passing my room. Irose, opened my door, and peeped out. A long black shadow wastrailing down the corridor. It was thrown by a man who walked softlydown the passage with a candle held in his hand. He was in shirt andtrousers, with no covering to his feet. I could merely see theoutline, but his height told me that it was Barrymore. He walked veryslowly and circumspectly, and there was something indescribablyguilty and furtive in his whole appearance.
I have told you that the corridor is broken by the balcony which runsround the hall, but that it is resumed upon the farther side. Iwaited until he had passed out of sight and then I followed him. WhenI came round the balcony he had reached the end of the farthercorridor, and I could see from the glimmer of light through an opendoor that he had entered one of the rooms. Now, all these rooms areunfurnished and unoccupied, so that his expedition became moremysterious than ever. The light shone steadily as if he were standingmotionless. I crept down the passage as noiselessly as I could andpeeped round the corner of the door.
Barrymore was crouching at the window with the candle held againstthe glass. His profile was half turned towards me, and his faceseemed to be rigid with expectation as he stared out into theblackness of the moor. For some minutes he stood watching intently.Then he gave a deep groan and with an impatient gesture he put outthe light. Instantly I made my way back to my room, and very shortlycame the stealthy steps passing once more upon their return journey.Long afterwards when I had fallen into a light sleep I heard a keyturn somewhere in a lock, but I could not tell whence the sound came.What it all means I cannot guess, but there is some secret businessgoing on in this house of gloom which sooner or later we shall get tothe bottom of. I do not trouble you with my theories, for you askedme to furnish you only with facts. I have had a long talk with SirHenry this morning, and we have made a plan of campaign founded uponmy observations of last night. I will not speak about it just now,but it should make my next report interesting reading.




     CHAPTER IX     Second Report of Dr. Watson

                        THE LIGHT UPON THE MOOR
Baskerville Hall, Oct. 15th.
My dear Holmes:If I was compelled to leave you without much news during the earlydays of my mission you must acknowledge that I am making up for losttime, and that events are now crowding thick and fast upon us. In mylast report I ended upon my top note with Barrymore at the window,and now I have quite a budget already which will, unless I am muchmistaken, considerably surprise you. Things have taken a turn which Icould not have anticipated. In some ways they have within the lastforty-eight hours become much clearer and in some ways they havebecome more complicated. But I will tell you all and you shall judgefor yourself.
Before breakfast on the morning following my adventure I went downthe corridor and examined the room in which Barrymore had been on thenight before. The western window through which he had stared sointently has, I noticed, one peculiarity above all other windows inthe house--it commands the nearest outlook on the moor. There is anopening between two trees which enables one from this point of viewto look right down upon it, while from all the other windows it isonly a distant glimpse which can be obtained. It follows, therefore,that Barrymore, since only this window would serve the purpose, musthave been looking out for something or somebody upon the moor. Thenight was very dark, so that I can hardly imagine how he could havehoped to see anyone. It had struck me that it was possible that somelove intrigue was on foot. That would have accounted for his stealthymovements and also for the uneasiness of his wife. The man is astriking-looking fellow, very well equipped to steal the heart of acountry girl, so that this theory seemed to have something to supportit. That opening of the door which I had heard after I had returnedto my room might mean that he had gone out to keep some clandestineappointment. So I reasoned with myself in the morning, and I tell youthe direction of my suspicions, however much the result may haveshown that they were unfounded.
But whatever the true explanation of Barrymore's movements might be,I felt that the responsibility of keeping them to myself until Icould explain them was more than I could bear. I had an interviewwith the baronet in his study after breakfast, and I told him allthat I had seen. He was less surprised than I had expected.
"I knew that Barrymore walked about nights, and I had a mind to speakto him about it," said he. "Two or three times I have heard his stepsin the passage, coming and going, just about the hour you name."
"Perhaps then he pays a visit every night to that particular window,"I suggested.
"Perhaps he does. If so, we should be able to shadow him, and seewhat it is that he is after. I wonder what your friend Holmes woulddo, if he were here."
"I believe that he would do exactly what you now suggest," said I."He would follow Barrymore and see what he did."
"Then we shall do it together."
"But surely he would hear us."
"The man is rather deaf, and in any case we must take our chance ofthat. We'll sit up in my room to-night and wait until he passes." SirHenry rubbed his hands with pleasure, and it was evident that hehailed the adventure as a relief to his somewhat quiet life upon themoor.
The baronet has been in communication with the architect who preparedthe plans for Sir Charles, and with a contractor from London, so thatwe may expect great changes to begin here soon. There have beendecorators and furnishers up from Plymouth, and it is evident thatour friend has large ideas, and means to spare no pains or expense torestore the grandeur of his family. When the house is renovated andrefurnished, all that he will need will be a wife to make itcomplete. Between ourselves there are pretty clear signs that thiswill not be wanting if the lady is willing, for I have seldom seen aman more infatuated with a woman than he is with our beautifulneighbour, Miss Stapleton. And yet the course of true love does notrun quite as smoothly as one would under the circumstances expect.To-day, for example, its surface was broken by a very unexpectedripple, which has caused our friend considerable perplexity andannoyance.
After the conversation which I have quoted about Barrymore, Sir Henryput on his hat and prepared to go out. As a matter of course I didthe same.
"What, are you coming, Watson?" he asked, looking at me in a curiousway.
"That depends on whether you are going on the moor," said I.
"Yes, I am."
"Well, you know what my instructions are. I am sorry to intrude, butyou heard how earnestly Holmes insisted that I should not leave you,and especially that you should not go alone upon the moor."
Sir Henry put his hand upon my shoulder with a pleasant smile.
"My dear fellow," said he, "Holmes, with all his wisdom, did notforesee some things which have happened since I have been on themoor. You understand me? I am sure that you are the last man in theworld who would wish to be a spoil-sport. I must go out alone."
It put me in a most awkward position. I was at a loss what to say orwhat to do, and before I had made up my mind he picked up his caneand was gone.
But when I came to think the matter over my conscience reproached mebitterly for having on any pretext allowed him to go out of my sight.I imagined what my feelings would be if I had to return to you and toconfess that some misfortune had occurred through my disregard foryour instructions. I assure you my cheeks flushed at the verythought. It might not even now be too late to overtake him, so I setoff at once in the direction of Merripit House.
I hurried along the road at the top of my speed without seeinganything of Sir Henry, until I came to the point where the moor pathbranches off. There, fearing that perhaps I had come in the wrongdirection after all, I mounted a hill from which I could command aview--the same hill which is cut into the dark quarry. Thence I sawhim at once. He was on the moor path, about a quarter of a mile off,and a lady was by his side who could only be Miss Stapleton. It wasclear that there was already an understanding between them and thatthey had met by appointment. They were walking slowly along in deepconversation, and I saw her making quick little movements of herhands as if she were very earnest in what she was saying, while helistened intently, and once or twice shook his head in strongdissent. I stood among the rocks watching them, very much puzzled asto what I should do next. To follow them and break into theirintimate conversation seemed to be an outrage, and yet my clear dutywas never for an instant to let him out of my sight. To act the spyupon a friend was a hateful task. Still, I could see no better coursethan to observe him from the hill, and to clear my conscience byconfessing to him afterwards what I had done. It is true that if anysudden danger had threatened him I was too far away to be of use, andyet I am sure that you will agree with me that the position was verydifficult, and that there was nothing more which I could do.
Our friend, Sir Henry, and the lady had halted on the path and werestanding deeply absorbed in their conversation, when I was suddenlyaware that I was not the only witness of their interview. A wisp ofgreen floating in the air caught my eye, and another glance showed methat it was carried on a stick by a man who was moving among thebroken ground. It was Stapleton with his butterfly-net. He was verymuch closer to the pair than I was, and he appeared to be moving intheir direction. At this instant Sir Henry suddenly drew MissStapleton to his side. His arm was round her, but it seemed to methat she was straining away from him with her face averted. Hestooped his head to hers, and she raised one hand as if in protest.Next moment I saw them spring apart and turn hurriedly round.Stapleton was the cause of the interruption. He was running wildlytowards them, his absurd net dangling behind him. He gesticulated andalmost danced with excitement in front of the lovers. What the scenemeant I could not imagine, but it seemed to me that Stapleton wasabusing Sir Henry, who offered explanations, which became more angryas the other refused to accept them. The lady stood by in haughtysilence. Finally Stapleton turned upon his heel and beckoned in aperemptory way to his sister, who, after an irresolute glance at SirHenry, walked off by the side of her brother. The naturalist's angrygestures showed that the lady was included in his displeasure. Thebaronet stood for a minute looking after them, and then he walkedslowly back the way that he had come, his head hanging, the verypicture of dejection.
What all this meant I could not imagine, but I was deeply ashamed tohave witnessed so intimate a scene without my friend's knowledge. Iran down the hill therefore and met the baronet at the bottom. Hisface was flushed with anger and his brows were wrinkled, like one whois at his wit's ends what to do.
"Halloa, Watson! Where have you dropped from?" said he. "You don'tmean to say that you came after me in spite of all?"
I explained everything to him: how I had found it impossible toremain behind, how I had followed him, and how I had witnessed allthat had occurred. For an instant his eyes blazed at me, but myfrankness disarmed his anger, and he broke at last into a ratherrueful laugh.
"You would have thought the middle of that prairie a fairly safeplace for a man to be private," said he, "but, by thunder, the wholecountry-side seems to have been out to see me do my wooing--and amighty poor wooing at that! Where had you engaged a seat?"
"I was on that hill."
"Quite in the back row, eh? But her brother was well up to the front.Did you see him come out on us?"
"Yes, I did."
"Did he ever strike you as being crazy--this brother of hers?"
"I can't say that he ever did."
"I dare say not. I always thought him sane enough until to-day, butyou can take it from me that either he or I ought to be in astrait-jacket. What's the matter with me, anyhow? You've lived nearme for some weeks, Watson. Tell me straight, now! Is there anythingthat would prevent me from making a good husband to a woman that Iloved?"
"I should say not."
"He can't object to my worldly position, so it must be myself that hehas this down on. What has he against me? I never hurt man or womanin my life that I know of. And yet he would not so much as let metouch the tips of her fingers."
"Did he say so?"
"That, and a deal more. I tell you, Watson, I've only known her thesefew weeks, but from the first I just felt that she was made for me,and she, too--she was happy when she was with me, and that I'llswear. There's a light in a woman's eyes that speaks louder thanwords. But he has never let us get together, and it was only to-dayfor the first time that I saw a chance of having a few words with heralone. She was glad to meet me, but when she did it was not love thatshe would talk about, and she wouldn't have let me talk about iteither if she could have stopped it. She kept coming back to it thatthis was a place of danger, and that she would never be happy until Ihad left it. I told her that since I had seen her I was in no hurryto leave it, and that if she really wanted me to go, the only way towork it was for her to arrange to go with me. With that I offered inas many words to marry her, but before she could answer, down camethis brother of hers, running at us with a face on him like a madman.He was just white with rage, and those light eyes of his were blazingwith fury. What was I doing with the lady? How dared I offer herattentions which were distasteful to her? Did I think that because Iwas a baronet I could do what I liked? If he had not been her brotherI should have known better how to answer him. As it was I told himthat my feelings towards his sister were such as I was not ashamedof, and that I hoped that she might honour me by becoming my wife.That seemed to make the matter no better, so then I lost my tempertoo, and I answered him rather more hotly than I should perhaps,considering that she was standing by. So it ended by his going offwith her, as you saw, and here am I as badly puzzled a man as any inthis county. Just tell me what it all means, Watson, and I'll owe youmore than ever I can hope to pay."
I tried one or two explanations, but, indeed, I was completelypuzzled myself. Our friend's title, his fortune, his age, hischaracter, and his appearance are all in his favour, and I knownothing against him unless it be this dark fate which runs in hisfamily. That his advances should be rejected so brusquely without anyreference to the lady's own wishes, and that the lady should acceptthe situation without protest, is very amazing. However, ourconjectures were set at rest by a visit from Stapleton himself thatvery afternoon. He had come to offer apologies for his rudeness ofthe morning, and after a long private interview with Sir Henry in hisstudy, the upshot of their conversation was that the breach is quitehealed, and that we are to dine at Merripit House next Friday as asign of it.
"I don't say now that he isn't a crazy man," said Sir Henry; "I can'tforget the look in his eyes when he ran at me this morning, but Imust allow that no man could make a more handsome apology than he hasdone."
"Did he give any explanation of his conduct?"
"His sister is everything in his life, he says. That is naturalenough, and I am glad that he should understand her value. They havealways been together, and according to his account he has been a verylonely man with only her as a companion, so that the thought oflosing her was really terrible to him. He had not understood, hesaid, that I was becoming attached to her, but when he saw with hisown eyes that it was really so, and that she might be taken away fromhim, it gave him such a shock that for a time he was not responsiblefor what he said or did. He was very sorry for all that had passed,and he recognized how foolish and how selfish it was that he shouldimagine that he could hold a beautiful woman like his sister tohimself for her whole life. If she had to leave him he had rather itwas to a neighbour like myself than to anyone else. But in any caseit was a blow to him, and it would take him some time before he couldprepare himself to meet it. He would withdraw all opposition upon hispart if I would promise for three months to let the matter rest andto be content with cultivating the lady's friendship during that timewithout claiming her love. This I promised, and so the matter rests."
So there is one of our small mysteries cleared up. It is something tohave touched bottom anywhere in this bog in which we are floundering.We know now why Stapleton looked with disfavour upon his sister'ssuitor--even when that suitor was so eligible a one as Sir Henry. Andnow I pass on to another thread which I have extricated out of thetangled skein, the mystery of the sobs in the night, of thetear-stained face of Mrs. Barrymore, of the secret journey of thebutler to the western lattice window. Congratulate me, my dearHolmes, and tell me that I have not disappointed you as anagent--that you do not regret the confidence which you showed in mewhen you sent me down. All these things have by one night's work beenthoroughly cleared.
I have said "by one night's work," but, in truth, it was by twonights' work, for on the first we drew entirely blank. I sat up withSir Henry in his rooms until nearly three o'clock in the morning, butno sound of any sort did we hear except the chiming clock upon thestairs. It was a most melancholy vigil, and ended by each of usfalling asleep in our chairs. Fortunately we were not discouraged,and we determined to try again. The next night we lowered the lamp,and sat smoking cigarettes without making the least sound. It wasincredible how slowly the hours crawled by, and yet we were helpedthrough it by the same sort of patient interest which the hunter mustfeel as he watches the trap into which he hopes the game may wander.One struck, and two, and we had almost for the second time given itup in despair, when in an instant we both sat bolt upright in ourchairs, with all our weary senses keenly on the alert once more. Wehad heard the creak of a step in the passage.
Very stealthily we heard it pass along until it died away in thedistance. Then the baronet gently opened his door and we set out inpursuit. Already our man had gone round the gallery, and the corridorwas all in darkness. Softly we stole along until we had come into theother wing. We were just in time to catch a glimpse of the tall,black-bearded figure, his shoulders rounded, as he tip-toed down thepassage. Then he passed through the same door as before, and thelight of the candle framed it in the darkness and shot one singleyellow beam across the gloom of the corridor. We shuffled cautiouslytowards it, trying every plank before we dared to put our wholeweight upon it. We had taken the precaution of leaving our bootsbehind us, but, even so, the old boards snapped and creaked beneathour tread. Sometimes it seemed impossible that he should fail to hearour approach. However, the man is fortunately rather deaf, and he wasentirely preoccupied in that which he was doing. When at last wereached the door and peeped through we found him crouching at thewindow, candle in hand, his white, intent face pressed against thepane, exactly as I had seen him two nights before.
We had arranged no plan of campaign, but the baronet is a man to whomthe most direct way is always the most natural. He walked into theroom, and as he did so Barrymore sprang up from the window with asharp hiss of his breath and stood, livid and trembling, before us.His dark eyes, glaring out of the white mask of his face, were fullof horror and astonishment as he gazed from Sir Henry to me.
"What are you doing here, Barrymore?"
"Nothing, sir." His agitation was so great that he could hardlyspeak, and the shadows sprang up and down from the shaking of hiscandle. "It was the window, sir. I go round at night to see that theyare fastened."
"On the second floor?"
"Yes, sir, all the windows."
"Look here, Barrymore," said Sir Henry, sternly; "we have made up ourminds to have the truth out of you, so it will save you trouble totell it sooner rather than later. Come, now! No lies! What were youdoing at that window?"
The fellow looked at us in a helpless way, and he wrung his handstogether like one who is in the last extremity of doubt and misery.
"I was doing no harm, sir. I was holding a candle to the window."
"And why were you holding a candle to the window?"
"Don't ask me, Sir Henry--don't ask me! I give you my word, sir, thatit is not my secret, and that I cannot tell it. If it concerned noone but myself I would not try to keep it from you."
A sudden idea occurred to me, and I took the candle from thetrembling hand of the butler.
"He must have been holding it as a signal," said I. "Let us see ifthere is any answer." I held it as he had done, and stared out intothe darkness of the night. Vaguely I could discern the black bank ofthe trees and the lighter expanse of the moor, for the moon wasbehind the clouds. And then I gave a cry of exultation, for a tinypin-point of yellow light had suddenly transfixed the dark veil, andglowed steadily in the centre of the black square framed by thewindow.
"There it is!" I cried.
"No, no, sir, it is nothing--nothing at all!" the butler broke in; "Iassure you, sir--"
"Move your light across the window, Watson!" cried the baronet. "See,the other moves also! Now, you rascal, do you deny that it is asignal? Come, speak up! Who is your confederate out yonder, and whatis this conspiracy that is going on?"
The man's face became openly defiant.
"It is my business, and not yours. I will not tell."
"Then you leave my employment right away."
"Very good, sir. If I must I must."
"And you go in disgrace. By thunder, you may well be ashamed ofyourself. Your family has lived with mine for over a hundred yearsunder this roof, and here I find you deep in some dark plot againstme."
"No, no, sir; no, not against you!" It was a woman's voice, and Mrs.Barrymore, paler and more horror-struck than her husband, wasstanding at the door. Her bulky figure in a shawl and skirt mighthave been comic were it not for the intensity of feeling upon herface.
"We have to go, Eliza. This is the end of it. You can pack ourthings," said the butler.
"Oh, John, John, have I brought you to this? It is my doing, SirHenry--all mine. He has done nothing except for my sake and because Iasked him."
"Speak out, then! What does it mean?"
"My unhappy brother is starving on the moor. We cannot let him perishat our very gates. The light is a signal to him that food is readyfor him, and his light out yonder is to show the spot to which tobring it."
"Then your brother is--"
"The escaped convict, sir--Selden, the criminal."
"That's the truth, sir," said Barrymore. "I said that it was not mysecret and that I could not tell it to you. But now you have heardit, and you will see that if there was a plot it was not againstyou."
This, then, was the explanation of the stealthy expeditions at nightand the light at the window. Sir Henry and I both stared at the womanin amazement. Was it possible that this stolidly respectable personwas of the same blood as one of the most notorious criminals in thecountry?
"Yes, sir, my name was Selden, and he is my younger brother. Wehumoured him too much when he was a lad, and gave him his own way ineverything until he came to think that the world was made for hispleasure, and that he could do what he liked in it. Then as he grewolder he met wicked companions, and the devil entered into him untilhe broke my mother's heart and dragged our name in the dirt. Fromcrime to crime he sank lower and lower, until it is only the mercy ofGod which has snatched him from the scaffold; but to me, sir, he wasalways the little curly-headed boy that I had nursed and played with,as an elder sister would. That was why he broke prison, sir. He knewthat I was here and that we could not refuse to help him. When hedragged himself here one night, weary and starving, with the wardershard at his heels, what could we do? We took him in and fed him andcared for him. Then you returned, sir, and my brother thought hewould be safer on the moor than anywhere else until the hue and crywas over, so he lay in hiding there. But every second night we madesure if he was still there by putting a light in the window, and ifthere was an answer my husband took out some bread and meat to him.Every day we hoped that he was gone, but as long as he was there wecould not desert him. That is the whole truth, as I am an honestChristian woman, and you will see that if there is blame in thematter it does not lie with my husband, but with me, for whose sakehe has done all that he has."
The woman's words came with an intense earnestness which carriedconviction with them.
"Is this true, Barrymore?"
"Yes, Sir Henry. Every word of it."
"Well, I cannot blame you for standing by your own wife. Forget whatI have said. Go to your room, you two, and we shall talk furtherabout this matter in the morning."
When they were gone we looked out of the window again. Sir Henry hadflung it open, and the cold night wind beat in upon our faces. Faraway in the black distance there still glowed that one tiny point ofyellow light.
"I wonder he dares," said Sir Henry.
"It may be so placed as to be only visible from here."
"Very likely. How far do you think it is?"
"Out by the Cleft Tor, I think."
"Not more than a mile or two off."
"Hardly that."
"Well, it cannot be far if Barrymore had to carry out the food to it.And he is waiting, this villain, beside that candle. By thunder,Watson, I am going out to take that man!"
The same thought had crossed my own mind. It was not as if theBarrymores had taken us into their confidence. Their secret had beenforced from them. The man was a danger to the community, anunmitigated scoundrel for whom there was neither pity nor excuse. Wewere only doing our duty in taking this chance of putting him backwhere he could do no harm. With his brutal and violent nature, otherswould have to pay the price if we held our hands. Any night, forexample, our neighbours the Stapletons might be attacked by him, andit may have been the thought of this which made Sir Henry so keenupon the adventure.
"I will come," said I.
"Then get your revolver and put on your boots. The sooner we startthe better, as the fellow may put out his light and be off."
In five minutes we were outside the door, starting upon ourexpedition. We hurried through the dark shrubbery, amid the dullmoaning of the autumn wind and the rustle of the falling leaves. Thenight air was heavy with the smell of damp and decay. Now and againthe moon peeped out for an instant, but clouds were driving over theface of the sky, and just as we came out on the moor a thin rainbegan to fall. The light still burned steadily in front.
"Are you armed?" I asked.
"I have a hunting-crop."
"We must close in on him rapidly, for he is said to be a desperatefellow. We shall take him by surprise and have him at our mercybefore he can resist."
"I say, Watson," said the baronet, "what would Holmes say to this?How about that hour of darkness in which the power of evil isexalted?"
As if in answer to his words there rose suddenly out of the vastgloom of the moor that strange cry which I had already heard upon theborders of the great Grimpen Mire. It came with the wind through thesilence of the night, a long, deep mutter, then a rising howl, andthen the sad moan in which it died away. Again and again it sounded,the whole air throbbing with it, strident, wild, and menacing. Thebaronet caught my sleeve and his face glimmered white through thedarkness.
"My God, what's that, Watson?"
"I don't know. It's a sound they have on the moor. I heard it oncebefore."
It died away, and an absolute silence closed in upon us. We stoodstraining our ears, but nothing came.
"Watson," said the baronet, "it was the cry of a hound."
My blood ran cold in my veins, for there was a break in his voicewhich told of the sudden horror which had seized him.
"What do they call this sound?" he asked.
"Who?"
"The folk on the country-side."
"Oh, they are ignorant people. Why should you mind what they callit?"
"Tell me, Watson. What do they say of it?"
I hesitated but could not escape the question.
"They say it is the cry of the Hound of the Baskervilles."
He groaned and was silent for a few moments.
"A hound it was," he said, at last, "but it seemed to come from milesaway, over yonder, I think."
"It was hard to say whence it came."
"It rose and fell with the wind. Isn't that the direction of thegreat Grimpen Mire?"
"Yes, it is."
"Well, it was up there. Come now, Watson, didn't you think yourselfthat it was the cry of a hound? I am not a child. You need not fearto speak the truth."
"Stapleton was with me when I heard it last. He said that it might bethe calling of a strange bird."
"No, no, it was a hound. My God, can there be some truth in all thesestories? Is it possible that I am really in danger from so dark acause? You don't believe it, do you, Watson?"
"No, no."
"And yet it was one thing to laugh about it in London, and it isanother to stand out here in the darkness of the moor and to hearsuch a cry as that. And my uncle! There was the footprint of thehound beside him as he lay. It all fits together. I don't think thatI am a coward, Watson, but that sound seemed to freeze my very blood.Feel my hand!"
It was as cold as a block of marble.
"You'll be all right to-morrow."
"I don't think I'll get that cry out of my head. What do you advisethat we do now?"
"Shall we turn back?"
"No, by thunder; we have come out to get our man, and we will do it.We after the convict, and a hell-hound, as likely as not, after us.Come on! We'll see it through if all the fiends of the pit were looseupon the moor."
We stumbled slowly along in the darkness, with the black loom of thecraggy hills around us, and the yellow speck of light burningsteadily in front. There is nothing so deceptive as the distance of alight upon a pitch-dark night, and sometimes the glimmer seemed to befar away upon the horizon and sometimes it might have been within afew yards of us. But at last we could see whence it came, and then weknew that we were indeed very close. A guttering candle was stuck ina crevice of the rocks which flanked it on each side so as to keepthe wind from it and also to prevent it from being visible, save inthe direction of Baskerville Hall. A boulder of granite concealed ourapproach, and crouching behind it we gazed over it at the signallight. It was strange to see this single candle burning there in themiddle of the moor, with no sign of life near it--just the onestraight yellow flame and the gleam of the rock on each side of it.
"What shall we do now?" whispered Sir Henry.
"Wait here. He must be near his light. Let us see if we can get aglimpse of him."
The words were hardly out of my mouth when we both saw him. Over therocks, in the crevice of which the candle burned, there was thrustout an evil yellow face, a terrible animal face, all seamed andscored with vile passions. Foul with mire, with a bristling beard,and hung with matted hair, it might well have belonged to one ofthose old savages who dwelt in the burrows on the hillsides. Thelight beneath him was reflected in his small, cunning eyes whichpeered fiercely to right and left through the darkness, like a craftyand savage animal who has heard the steps of the hunters.
Something had evidently aroused his suspicions. It may have been thatBarrymore had some private signal which we had neglected to give, orthe fellow may have had some other reason for thinking that all wasnot well, but I could read his fears upon his wicked face. Anyinstant he might dash out the light and vanish in the darkness. Isprang forward therefore, and Sir Henry did the same. At the samemoment the convict screamed out a curse at us and hurled a rock whichsplintered up against the boulder which had sheltered us. I caughtone glimpse of his short, squat, strongly-built figure as he sprangto his feet and turned to run. At the same moment by a lucky chancethe moon broke through the clouds. We rushed over the brow of thehill, and there was our man running with great speed down the otherside, springing over the stones in his way with the activity of amountain goat. A lucky long shot of my revolver might have crippledhim, but I had brought it only to defend myself if attacked, and notto shoot an unarmed man who was running away.
We were both swift runners and in fairly good training, but we soonfound that we had no chance of overtaking him. We saw him for a longtime in the moonlight until he was only a small speck moving swiftlyamong the boulders upon the side of a distant hill. We ran and ranuntil we were completely blown, but the space between us grew everwider. Finally we stopped and sat panting on two rocks, while wewatched him disappearing in the distance.
And it was at this moment that there occurred a most strange andunexpected thing. We had risen from our rocks and were turning to gohome, having abandoned the hopeless chase. The moon was low upon theright, and the jagged pinnacle of a granite tor stood up against thelower curve of its silver disc. There, outlined as black as an ebonystatue on that shining back-ground, I saw the figure of a man uponthe tor. Do not think that it was a delusion, Holmes. I assure youthat I have never in my life seen anything more clearly. As far as Icould judge, the figure was that of a tall, thin man. He stood withhis legs a little separated, his arms folded, his head bowed, as ifhe were brooding over that enormous wilderness of peat and granitewhich lay before him. He might have been the very spirit of thatterrible place. It was not the convict. This man was far from theplace where the latter had disappeared. Besides, he was a much tallerman. With a cry of surprise I pointed him out to the baronet, but inthe instant during which I had turned to grasp his arm the man wasgone. There was the sharp pinnacle of granite still cutting the loweredge of the moon, but its peak bore no trace of that silent andmotionless figure.
I wished to go in that direction and to search the tor, but it wassome distance away. The baronet's nerves were still quivering fromthat cry, which recalled the dark story of his family, and he was notin the mood for fresh adventures. He had not seen this lonely manupon the tor and could not feel the thrill which his strange presenceand his commanding attitude had given to me. "A warder, no doubt,"said he. "The moor has been thick with them since this fellowescaped." Well, perhaps his explanation may be the right one, but Ishould like to have some further proof of it. To-day we mean tocommunicate to the Princetown people where they should look for theirmissing man, but it is hard lines that we have not actually had thetriumph of bringing him back as our own prisoner. Such are theadventures of last night, and you must acknowledge, my dear Holmes,that I have done you very well in the matter of a report. Much ofwhat I tell you is no doubt quite irrelevant, but still I feel thatit is best that I should let you have all the facts and leave you toselect for yourself those which will be of most service to you inhelping you to your conclusions. We are certainly making someprogress. So far as the Barrymores go we have found the motive oftheir actions, and that has cleared up the situation very much. Butthe moor with its mysteries and its strange inhabitants remains asinscrutable as ever. Perhaps in my next I may be able to throw somelight upon this also. Best of all would it be if you could come downto us. In any case you will hear from me again in the course of thenext few days.




     CHAPTER X     Extract from the Diary of Dr. Watson

So far I have been able to quote from the reports which I haveforwarded during these early days to Sherlock Holmes. Now, however, Ihave arrived at a point in my narrative where I am compelled toabandon this method and to trust once more to my recollections, aidedby the diary which I kept at the time. A few extracts from the latterwill carry me on to those scenes which are indelibly fixed in everydetail upon my memory. I proceed, then, from the morning whichfollowed our abortive chase of the convict and our other strangeexperiences upon the moor.
October 16th.--A dull and foggy day with a drizzle of rain. The houseis banked in with rolling clouds, which rise now and then to show thedreary curves of the moor, with thin, silver veins upon the sides ofthe hills, and the distant boulders gleaming where the light strikesupon their wet faces. It is melancholy outside and in. The baronet isin a black reaction after the excitements of the night. I amconscious myself of a weight at my heart and a feeling of impendingdanger--ever present danger, which is the more terrible because I amunable to define it.
And have I not cause for such a feeling? Consider the long sequenceof incidents which have all pointed to some sinister influence whichis at work around us. There is the death of the last occupant of theHall, fulfilling so exactly the conditions of the family legend, andthere are the repeated reports from peasants of the appearance of astrange creature upon the moor. Twice I have with my own ears heardthe sound which resembled the distant baying of a hound. It isincredible, impossible, that it should really be outside the ordinarylaws of nature. A spectral hound which leaves material footmarks andfills the air with its howling is surely not to be thought of.Stapleton may fall in with such a superstition, and Mortimer also;but if I have one quality upon earth it is common-sense, and nothingwill persuade me to believe in such a thing. To do so would be todescend to the level of these poor peasants, who are not content witha mere fiend dog but must needs describe him with hell-fire shootingfrom his mouth and eyes. Holmes would not listen to such fancies, andI am his agent. But facts are facts, and I have twice heard thiscrying upon the moor. Suppose that there were really some huge houndloose upon it; that would go far to explain everything. But wherecould such a hound lie concealed, where did it get its food, wheredid it come from, how was it that no one saw it by day? It must beconfessed that the natural explanation offers almost as manydifficulties as the other. And always, apart from the hound, there isthe fact of the human agency in London, the man in the cab, and theletter which warned Sir Henry against the moor. This at least wasreal, but it might have been the work of a protecting friend aseasily as of an enemy. Where is that friend or enemy now? Has heremained in London, or has he followed us down here? Could he--couldhe be the stranger whom I saw upon the tor?
It is true that I have had only the one glance at him, and yet thereare some things to which I am ready to swear. He is no one whom Ihave seen down here, and I have now met all the neighbours. Thefigure was far taller than that of Stapleton, far thinner than thatof Frankland. Barrymore it might possibly have been, but we had lefthim behind us, and I am certain that he could not have followed us. Astranger then is still dogging us, just as a stranger dogged us inLondon. We have never shaken him off. If I could lay my hands uponthat man, then at last we might find ourselves at the end of all ourdifficulties. To this one purpose I must now devote all my energies.
My first impulse was to tell Sir Henry all my plans. My second andwisest one is to play my own game and speak as little as possible toanyone. He is silent and distrait. His nerves have been strangelyshaken by that sound upon the moor. I will say nothing to add to hisanxieties, but I will take my own steps to attain my own end.
We had a small scene this morning after breakfast. Barrymore askedleave to speak with Sir Henry, and they were closeted in his studysome little time. Sitting in the billiard-room I more than once heardthe sound of voices raised, and I had a pretty good idea what thepoint was which was under discussion. After a time the baronet openedhis door and called for me.
"Barrymore considers that he has a grievance," he said. "He thinksthat it was unfair on our part to hunt his brother-in-law down whenhe, of his own free will, had told us the secret."
The butler was standing very pale but very collected before us.
"I may have spoken too warmly, sir," said he, "and if I have, I amsure that I beg your pardon. At the same time, I was very muchsurprised when I heard you two gentlemen come back this morning andlearned that you had been chasing Selden. The poor fellow has enoughto fight against without my putting more upon his track."
"If you had told us of your own free will it would have been adifferent thing," said the baronet, "you only told us, or rather yourwife only told us, when it was forced from you and you could not helpyourself."
"I didn't think you would have taken advantage of it, SirHenry--indeed I didn't."
"The man is a public danger. There are lonely houses scattered overthe moor, and he is a fellow who would stick at nothing. You onlywant to get a glimpse of his face to see that. Look at Mr.Stapleton's house, for example, with no one but himself to defend it.There's no safety for anyone until he is under lock and key."
"He'll break into no house, sir. I give you my solemn word upon that.But he will never trouble anyone in this country again. I assure you,Sir Henry, that in a very few days the necessary arrangements willhave been made and he will be on his way to South America. For God'ssake, sir, I beg of you not to let the police know that he is stillon the moor. They have given up the chase there, and he can lie quietuntil the ship is ready for him. You can't tell on him withoutgetting my wife and me into trouble. I beg you, sir, to say nothingto the police."
"What do you say, Watson?"
I shrugged my shoulders. "If he were safely out of the country itwould relieve the tax-payer of a burden."
"But how about the chance of his holding someone up before he goes?"
"He would not do anything so mad, sir. We have provided him with allthat he can want. To commit a crime would be to show where he washiding."
"That is true," said Sir Henry. "Well, Barrymore--"
"God bless you, sir, and thank you from my heart! It would havekilled my poor wife had he been taken again."
"I guess we are aiding and abetting a felony, Watson? But, after whatwe have heard I don't feel as if I could give the man up, so there isan end of it. All right, Barrymore, you can go."
With a few broken words of gratitude the man turned, but he hesitatedand then came back.
"You've been so kind to us, sir, that I should like to do the best Ican for you in return. I know something, Sir Henry, and perhaps Ishould have said it before, but it was long after the inquest that Ifound it out. I've never breathed a word about it yet to mortal man.It's about poor Sir Charles's death."
The baronet and I were both upon our feet. "Do you know how he died?"
"No, sir, I don't know that."
"What then?"
"I know why he was at the gate at that hour. It was to meet a woman."
"To meet a woman! He?"
"Yes, sir."
"And the woman's name?"
"I can't give you the name, sir, but I can give you the initials. Herinitials were L. L."
"How do you know this, Barrymore?"
"Well, Sir Henry, your uncle had a letter that morning. He hadusually a great many letters, for he was a public man and well knownfor his kind heart, so that everyone who was in trouble was glad toturn to him. But that morning, as it chanced, there was only this oneletter, so I took the more notice of it. It was from Coombe Tracey,and it was addressed in a woman's hand."
"Well?"
"Well, sir, I thought no more of the matter, and never would havedone had it not been for my wife. Only a few weeks ago she wascleaning out Sir Charles's study--it had never been touched since hisdeath--and she found the ashes of a burned letter in the back of thegrate. The greater part of it was charred to pieces, but one littleslip, the end of a page, hung together, and the writing could stillbe read, though it was gray on a black ground. It seemed to us to bea postscript at the end of the letter, and it said: 'Please, please,as you are a gentleman, burn this letter, and be at the gate by teno'clock'. Beneath it were signed the initials L. L."
"Have you got that slip?"
"No, sir, it crumbled all to bits after we moved it."
"Had Sir Charles received any other letters in the same writing?"
"Well, sir, I took no particular notice of his letters. I should nothave noticed this one, only it happened to come alone."
"And you have no idea who L. L. is?"
"No, sir. No more than you have. But I expect if we could lay ourhands upon that lady we should know more about Sir Charles's death."
"I cannot understand, Barrymore, how you came to conceal thisimportant information."
"Well, sir, it was immediately after that our own trouble came to us.And then again, sir, we were both of us very fond of Sir Charles, aswe well might be considering all that he has done for us. To rakethis up couldn't help our poor master, and it's well to go carefullywhen there's a lady in the case. Even the best of us--"
"You thought it might injure his reputation?"
"Well, sir, I thought no good could come of it. But now you have beenkind to us, and I feel as if it would be treating you unfairly not totell you all that I know about the matter."
"Very good, Barrymore; you can go." When the butler had left us SirHenry turned to me. "Well, Watson, what do you think of this newlight?"
"It seems to leave the darkness rather blacker than before."
"So I think. But if we can only trace L. L. it should clear up thewhole business. We have gained that much. We know that there issomeone who has the facts if we can only find her. What do you thinkwe should do?"
"Let Holmes know all about it at once. It will give him the clue forwhich he has been seeking. I am much mistaken if it does not bringhim down."
I went at once to my room and drew up my report of the morning'sconversation for Holmes. It was evident to me that he had been verybusy of late, for the notes which I had from Baker Street were fewand short, with no comments upon the information which I had suppliedand hardly any reference to my mission. No doubt his blackmailingcase is absorbing all his faculties. And yet this new factor mustsurely arrest his attention and renew his interest. I wish that hewere here.
October 17th.--All day to-day the rain poured down, rustling on theivy and dripping from the eaves. I thought of the convict out uponthe bleak, cold, shelterless moor. Poor devil! Whatever his crimes,he has suffered something to atone for them. And then I thought ofthat other one--the face in the cab, the figure against the moon. Washe also out in that deluged--the unseen watcher, the man of darkness?In the evening I put on my waterproof and I walked far upon thesodden moor, full of dark imaginings, the rain beating upon my faceand the wind whistling about my ears. God help those who wander intothe great mire now, for even the firm uplands are becoming a morass.I found the black tor upon which I had seen the solitary watcher, andfrom its craggy summit I looked out myself across the melancholydowns. Rain squalls drifted across their russet face, and the heavy,slate-coloured clouds hung low over the landscape, trailing in graywreaths down the sides of the fantastic hills. In the distant hollowon the left, half hidden by the mist, the two thin towers ofBaskerville Hall rose above the trees. They were the only signs ofhuman life which I could see, save only those prehistoric huts whichlay thickly upon the slopes of the hills. Nowhere was there any traceof that lonely man whom I had seen on the same spot two nightsbefore.
As I walked back I was overtaken by Dr. Mortimer driving in hisdog-cart over a rough moorland track which led from the outlyingfarmhouse of Foulmire. He has been very attentive to us, and hardly aday has passed that he has not called at the Hall to see how we weregetting on. He insisted upon my climbing into his dog-cart, and hegave me a lift homeward. I found him much troubled over thedisappearance of his little spaniel. It had wandered on to the moorand had never come back. I gave him such consolation as I might, butI thought of the pony on the Grimpen Mire, and I do not fancy that hewill see his little dog again.
"By the way, Mortimer," said I as we jolted along the rough road, "Isuppose there are few people living within driving distance of thiswhom you do not know?"
"Hardly any, I think."
"Can you, then, tell me the name of any woman whose initials are L.L.?"
He thought for a few minutes.
"No," said he. "There are a few gipsies and labouring folk for whom Ican't answer, but among the farmers or gentry there is no one whoseinitials are those. Wait a bit though," he added after a pause."There is Laura Lyons--her initials are L. L.--but she lives inCoombe Tracey."
"Who is she?" I asked.
"She is Frankland's daughter."
"What! Old Frankland the crank?"
"Exactly. She married an artist named Lyons, who came sketching onthe moor. He proved to be a blackguard and deserted her. The faultfrom what I hear may not have been entirely on one side. Her fatherrefused to have anything to do with her because she had marriedwithout his consent, and perhaps for one or two other reasons aswell. So, between the old sinner and the young one the girl has had apretty bad time."
"How does she live?"
"I fancy old Frankland allows her a pittance, but it cannot be more,for his own affairs are considerably involved. Whatever she may havedeserved one could not allow her to go hopelessly to the bad. Herstory got about, and several of the people here did something toenable her to earn an honest living. Stapleton did for one, and SirCharles for another. I gave a trifle myself. It was to set her up ina typewriting business."
He wanted to know the object of my inquiries, but I managed tosatisfy his curiosity without telling him too much, for there is noreason why we should take anyone into our confidence. To-morrowmorning I shall find my way to Coombe Tracey, and if I can see thisMrs. Laura Lyons, of equivocal reputation, a long step will have beenmade towards clearing one incident in this chain of mysteries. I amcertainly developing the wisdom of the serpent, for when Mortimerpressed his questions to an inconvenient extent I asked him casuallyto what type Frankland's skull belonged, and so heard nothing butcraniology for the rest of our drive. I have not lived for years withSherlock Holmes for nothing.
I have only one other incident to record upon this tempestuous andmelancholy day. This was my conversation with Barrymore just now,which gives me one more strong card which I can play in due time.
Mortimer had stayed to dinner, and he and the baronet played cartafterwards. The butler brought me my coffee into the library, and Itook the chance to ask him a few questions.
"Well," said I, "has this precious relation of yours departed, or ishe still lurking out yonder?"
"I don't know, sir. I hope to heaven that he has gone, for he hasbrought nothing but trouble here! I've not heard of him since I leftout food for him last, and that was three days ago."
"Did you see him then?"
"No, sir, but the food was gone when next I went that way."
"Then he was certainly there?"
"So you would think, sir, unless it was the other man who took it."
I sat with my coffee-cup halfway to my lips and stared at Barrymore.
"You know that there is another man then?"
"Yes, sir; there is another man upon the moor."
"Have you seen him?"
"No, sir."
"How do you know of him then?"
"Selden told me of him, sir, a week ago or more. He's in hiding, too,but he's not a convict as far as I can make out. I don't like it, Dr.Watson--I tell you straight, sir, that I don't like it." He spokewith a sudden passion of earnestness.
"Now, listen to me, Barrymore! I have no interest in this matter butthat of your master. I have come here with no object except to helphim. Tell me, frankly, what it is that you don't like."
Barrymore hesitated for a moment, as if he regretted his outburst, orfound it difficult to express his own feelings in words.
"It's all these goings-on, sir," he cried at last, waving his handtowards the rain-lashed window which faced the moor. "There's foulplay somewhere, and there's black villainy brewing, to that I'llswear! Very glad I should be, sir, to see Sir Henry on his way backto London again!"
"But what is it that alarms you?"
"Look at Sir Charles's death! That was bad enough, for all that thecoroner said. Look at the noises on the moor at night. There's not aman would cross it after sundown if he was paid for it. Look at thisstranger hiding out yonder, and watching and waiting! What's hewaiting for? What does it mean? It means no good to anyone of thename of Baskerville, and very glad I shall be to be quit of it all onthe day that Sir Henry's new servants are ready to take over theHall."
"But about this stranger," said I. "Can you tell me anything abouthim? What did Selden say? Did he find out where he hid, or what hewas doing?"
"He saw him once or twice, but he is a deep one, and gives nothingaway. At first he thought that he was the police, but soon he foundthat he had some lay of his own. A kind of gentleman he was, as faras he could see, but what he was doing he could not make out."
"And where did he say that he lived?"
"Among the old houses on the hillside--the stone huts where the oldfolk used to live."
"But how about his food?"
"Selden found out that he has got a lad who works for him and bringshim all he needs. I dare say he goes to Coombe Tracey for what hewants."
"Very good, Barrymore. We may talk further of this some other time."When the butler had gone I walked over to the black window, and Ilooked through a blurred pane at the driving clouds and at thetossing outline of the wind-swept trees. It is a wild night indoors,and what must it be in a stone hut upon the moor. What passion ofhatred can it be which leads a man to lurk in such a place at such atime! And what deep and earnest purpose can he have which calls forsuch a trial! There, in that hut upon the moor, seems to lie the verycentre of that problem which has vexed me so sorely. I swear thatanother day shall not have passed before I have done all that man cando to reach the heart of the mystery.




     CHAPTER XI     The Man on the Tor

The extract from my private diary which forms the last chapter hasbrought my narrative up to the 18th of October, a time when thesestrange events began to move swiftly towards their terribleconclusion. The incidents of the next few days are indelibly gravenupon my recollection, and I can tell them without reference to thenotes made at the time. I start then from the day which succeededthat upon which I had established two facts of great importance, theone that Mrs. Laura Lyons of Coombe Tracey had written to Sir CharlesBaskerville and made an appointment with him at the very place andhour that he met his death, the other that the lurking man upon themoor was to be found among the stone huts upon the hill-side. Withthese two facts in my possession I felt that either my intelligenceor my courage must be deficient if I could not throw some furtherlight upon these dark places.
I had no opportunity to tell the baronet what I had learned aboutMrs. Lyons upon the evening before, for Dr. Mortimer remained withhim at cards until it was very late. At breakfast, however, Iinformed him about my discovery, and asked him whether he would careto accompany me to Coombe Tracey. At first he was very eager to come,but on second thoughts it seemed to both of us that if I went alonethe results might be better. The more formal we made the visit theless information we might obtain. I left Sir Henry behind, therefore,not without some prickings of conscience, and drove off upon my newquest.
When I reached Coombe Tracey I told Perkins to put up the horses, andI made inquiries for the lady whom I had come to interrogate. I hadno difficulty in finding her rooms, which were central and wellappointed. A maid showed me in without ceremony, and as I entered thesitting-room a lady, who was sitting before a Remington typewriter,sprang up with a pleasant smile of welcome. Her face fell, however,when she saw that I was a stranger, and she sat down again and askedme the object of my visit.
The first impression left by Mrs. Lyons was one of extreme beauty.Her eyes and hair were of the same rich hazel colour, and her cheeks,though considerably freckled, were flushed with the exquisite bloomof the brunette, the dainty pink which lurks at the heart of thesulphur rose. Admiration was, I repeat, the first impression. But thesecond was criticism. There was something subtly wrong with the face,some coarseness of expression, some hardness, perhaps, of eye, somelooseness of lip which marred its perfect beauty. But these, ofcourse, are after-thoughts. At the moment I was simply conscious thatI was in the presence of a very handsome woman, and that she wasasking me the reasons for my visit. I had not quite understood untilthat instant how delicate my mission was.
"I have the pleasure," said I, "of knowing your father." It was aclumsy introduction, and the lady made me feel it.
"There is nothing in common between my father and me," she said. "Iowe him nothing, and his friends are not mine. If it were not for thelate Sir Charles Baskerville and some other kind hearts I might havestarved for all that my father cared."
"It was about the late Sir Charles Baskerville that I have come hereto see you."
The freckles started out on the lady's face.
"What can I tell you about him?" she asked, and her fingers playednervously over the stops of her typewriter.
"You knew him, did you not?"
"I have already said that I owe a great deal to his kindness. If I amable to support myself it is largely due to the interest which hetook in my unhappy situation."
"Did you correspond with him?"
The lady looked quickly up with an angry gleam in her hazel eyes.
"What is the object of these questions?" she asked sharply.
"The object is to avoid a public scandal. It is better that I shouldask them here than that the matter should pass outside our control."
She was silent and her face was still very pale. At last she lookedup with something reckless and defiant in her manner.
"Well, I'll answer," she said. "What are your questions?"
"Did you correspond with Sir Charles?"
"I certainly wrote to him once or twice to acknowledge his delicacyand his generosity."
"Have you the dates of those letters?"
"No."
"Have you ever met him?"
"Yes, once or twice, when he came into Coombe Tracey. He was a veryretiring man, and he preferred to do good by stealth."
"But if you saw him so seldom and wrote so seldom, how did he knowenough about your affairs to be able to help you, as you say that hehas done?"
She met my difficulty with the utmost readiness.
"There were several gentlemen who knew my sad history and united tohelp me. One was Mr. Stapleton, a neighbour and intimate friend ofSir Charles's. He was exceedingly kind, and it was through him thatSir Charles learned about my affairs."
I knew already that Sir Charles Baskerville had made Stapleton hisalmoner upon several occasions, so the lady's statement bore theimpress of truth upon it.
"Did you ever write to Sir Charles asking him to meet you?" Icontinued.
Mrs. Lyons flushed with anger again.
"Really, sir, this is a very extraordinary question."
"I am sorry, madam, but I must repeat it."
"Then I answer, certainly not."
"Not on the very day of Sir Charles's death?"
The flush had faded in an instant, and a deathly face was before me.Her dry lips could not speak the "No" which I saw rather than heard.
"Surely your memory deceives you," said I. "I could even quote apassage of your letter. It ran 'Please, please, as you are agentleman, burn this letter, and be at the gate by ten o'clock.'"
I thought that she had fainted, but she recovered herself by asupreme effort.
"Is there no such thing as a gentleman?" she gasped.
"You do Sir Charles an injustice. He did burn the letter. Butsometimes a letter may be legible even when burned. You acknowledgenow that you wrote it?"
"Yes, I did write it," she cried, pouring out her soul in a torrentof words. "I did write it. Why should I deny it? I have no reason tobe ashamed of it. I wished him to help me. I believed that if I hadan interview I could gain his help, so I asked him to meet me."
"But why at such an hour?"
"Because I had only just learned that he was going to London next dayand might be away for months. There were reasons why I could not getthere earlier."
"But why a rendezvous in the garden instead of a visit to the house?"
"Do you think a woman could go alone at that hour to a bachelor'shouse?"
"Well, what happened when you did get there?"
"I never went."
"Mrs. Lyons!"
"No, I swear it to you on all I hold sacred. I never went. Somethingintervened to prevent my going."
"What was that?"
"That is a private matter. I cannot tell it."
"You acknowledge then that you made an appointment with Sir Charlesat the very hour and place at which he met his death, but you denythat you kept the appointment."
"That is the truth."
Again and again I cross-questioned her, but I could never get pastthat point.
"Mrs. Lyons," said I, as I rose from this long and inconclusiveinterview, "you are taking a very great responsibility and puttingyourself in a very false position by not making an absolutely cleanbreast of all that you know. If I have to call in the aid of thepolice you will find how seriously you are compromised. If yourposition is innocent, why did you in the first instance deny havingwritten to Sir Charles upon that date?"
"Because I feared that some false conclusion might be drawn from itand that I might find myself involved in a scandal."
"And why were you so pressing that Sir Charles should destroy yourletter?"
"If you have read the letter you will know."
"I did not say that I had read all the letter."
"You quoted some of it."
"I quoted the postscript. The letter had, as I said, been burned andit was not all legible. I ask you once again why it was that you wereso pressing that Sir Charles should destroy this letter which hereceived on the day of his death."
"The matter is a very private one."
"The more reason why you should avoid a public investigation."
"I will tell you, then. If you have heard anything of my unhappyhistory you will know that I made a rash marriage and had reason toregret it."
"I have heard so much."
"My life has been one incessant persecution from a husband whom Iabhor. The law is upon his side, and every day I am faced by thepossibility that he may force me to live with him. At the time that Iwrote this letter to Sir Charles I had learned that there was aprospect of my regaining my freedom if certain expenses could be met.It meant everything to me--peace of mind, happiness,self-respect--everything. I knew Sir Charles's generosity, and Ithought that if he heard the story from my own lips he would helpme."
"Then how is it that you did not go?"
"Because I received help in the interval from another source."
"Why then, did you not write to Sir Charles and explain this?"
"So I should have done had I not seen his death in the paper nextmorning."
The woman's story hung coherently together, and all my questions wereunable to shake it. I could only check it by finding if she had,indeed, instituted divorce proceedings against her husband at orabout the time of the tragedy.
It was unlikely that she would dare to say that she had not been toBaskerville Hall if she really had been, for a trap would benecessary to take her there, and could not have returned to CoombeTracey until the early hours of the morning. Such an excursion couldnot be kept secret. The probability was, therefore, that she wastelling the truth, or, at least, a part of the truth. I came awaybaffled and disheartened. Once again I had reached that dead wallwhich seemed to be built across every path by which I tried to get atthe object of my mission. And yet the more I thought of the lady'sface and of her manner the more I felt that something was being heldback from me. Why should she turn so pale? Why should she fightagainst every admission until it was forced from her? Why should shehave been so reticent at the time of the tragedy? Surely theexplanation of all this could not be as innocent as she would have mebelieve. For the moment I could proceed no farther in that direction,but must turn back to that other clue which was to be sought foramong the stone huts upon the moor.
And that was a most vague direction. I realized it as I drove backand noted how hill after hill showed traces of the ancient people.Barrymore's only indication had been that the stranger lived in oneof these abandoned huts, and many hundreds of them are scatteredthroughout the length and breadth of the moor. But I had my ownexperience for a guide since it had shown me the man himself standingupon the summit of the Black Tor. That then should be the centre ofmy search. From there I should explore every hut upon the moor untilI lighted upon the right one. If this man were inside it I shouldfind out from his own lips, at the point of my revolver if necessary,who he was and why he had dogged us so long. He might slip away fromus in the crowd of Regent Street, but it would puzzle him to do soupon the lonely moor. On the other hand, if I should find the hut andits tenant should not be within it I must remain there, however longthe vigil, until he returned. Holmes had missed him in London. Itwould indeed be a triumph for me if I could run him to earth, wheremy master had failed.
Luck had been against us again and again in this inquiry, but now atlast it came to my aid. And the messenger of good fortune was noneother than Mr. Frankland, who was standing, gray-whiskered andred-faced, outside the gate of his garden, which opened on to thehigh road along which I travelled.
"Good-day, Dr. Watson," cried he with unwonted good humour, "you mustreally give your horses a rest, and come in to have a glass of wineand to congratulate me."
My feelings towards him were very far from being friendly after whatI had heard of his treatment of his daughter, but I was anxious tosend Perkins and the wagonette home, and the opportunity was a goodone. I alighted and sent a message to Sir Henry that I should walkover in time for dinner. Then I followed Frankland into hisdining-room.
"It is a great day for me, sir--one of the red-letter days of mylife," he cried with many chuckles. "I have brought off a doubleevent. I mean to teach them in these parts that law is law, and thatthere is a man here who does not fear to invoke it. I haveestablished a right of way through the centre of old Middleton'spark, slap across it, sir, within a hundred yards of his own frontdoor. What do you think of that? We'll teach these magnates that theycannot ride roughshod over the rights of the commoners, confoundthem! And I've closed the wood where the Fernworthy folk used topicnic. These infernal people seem to think that there are no rightsof property, and that they can swarm where they like with theirpapers and their bottles. Both cases decided, Dr. Watson, and both inmy favour. I haven't had such a day since I had Sir John Morland fortrespass, because he shot in his own warren."
"How on earth did you do that?"
"Look it up in the books, sir. It will repay reading--Frankland v.Morland, Court of Queen's Bench. It cost me 200 pounds, but I got myverdict."
"Did it do you any good?"
"None, sir, none. I am proud to say that I had no interest in thematter. I act entirely from a sense of public duty. I have no doubt,for example, that the Fernworthy people will burn me in effigyto-night. I told the police last time they did it that they shouldstop these disgraceful exhibitions. The County Constabulary is in ascandalous state, sir, and it has not afforded me the protection towhich I am entitled. The case of Frankland v. Regina will bring thematter before the attention of the public. I told them that theywould have occasion to regret their treatment of me, and already mywords have come true."
"How so?" I asked.
The old man put on a very knowing expression.
"Because I could tell them what they are dying to know; but nothingwould induce me to help the rascals in any way."
I had been casting round for some excuse by which I could get awayfrom his gossip, but now I began to wish to hear more of it. I hadseen enough of the contrary nature of the old sinner to understandthat any strong sign of interest would be the surest way to stop hisconfidences.
"Some poaching case, no doubt?" said I, with an indifferent manner.
"Ha, ha, my boy, a very much more important matter than that! Whatabout the convict on the moor?"
I started. "You don't mean that you know where he is?" said I.
"I may not know exactly where he is, but I am quite sure that I couldhelp the police to lay their hands on him. Has it never struck youthat the way to catch that man was to find out where he got his food,and so trace it to him?"
He certainly seemed to be getting uncomfortably near the truth. "Nodoubt," said I; "but how do you know that he is anywhere upon themoor?"
"I know it because I have seen with my own eyes the messenger whotakes him his food."
My heart sank for Barrymore. It was a serious thing to be in thepower of this spiteful old busybody. But his next remark took aweight from my mind.
"You'll be surprised to hear that his food is taken to him by achild. I see him every day through my telescope upon the roof. Hepasses along the same path at the same hour, and to whom should he begoing except to the convict?"
Here was luck indeed! And yet I suppressed all appearance ofinterest. A child! Barrymore had said that our unknown was suppliedby a boy. It was on his track, and not upon the convict's, thatFrankland had stumbled. If I could get his knowledge it might save mea long and weary hunt. But incredulity and indifference wereevidently my strongest cards.
"I should say that it was much more likely that it was the son of oneof the moorland shepherds taking out his father's dinner."
The least appearance of opposition struck fire out of the oldautocrat. His eyes looked malignantly at me, and his gray whiskersbristled like those of an angry cat.
"Indeed, sir!" said he, pointing out over the wide-stretching moor."Do you see that Black Tor over yonder? Well, do you see the low hillbeyond with the thornbush upon it? It is the stoniest part of thewhole moor. Is that a place where a shepherd would be likely to takehis station? Your suggestion, sir, is a most absurd one."
I meekly answered that I had spoken without knowing all the facts. Mysubmission pleased him and led him to further confidences.
"You may be sure, sir, that I have very good grounds before I come toan opinion. I have seen the boy again and again with his bundle.Every day, and sometimes twice a day, I have been able--but wait amoment, Dr. Watson. Do my eyes deceive me, or is there at the presentmoment something moving upon that hill-side?"
It was several miles off, but I could distinctly see a small dark dotagainst the dull green and gray.
"Come, sir, come!" cried Frankland, rushing upstairs. "You will seewith your own eyes and judge for yourself."
The telescope, a formidable instrument mounted upon a tripod, stoodupon the flat leads of the house. Frankland clapped his eye to it andgave a cry of satisfaction.
"Quick, Dr. Watson, quick, before he passes over the hill!"
There he was, sure enough, a small urchin with a little bundle uponhis shoulder, toiling slowly up the hill. When he reached the crest Isaw the ragged uncouth figure outlined for an instant against thecold blue sky. He looked round him with a furtive and stealthy air,as one who dreads pursuit. Then he vanished over the hill.
"Well! Am I right?"
"Certainly, there is a boy who seems to have some secret errand."
"And what the errand is even a county constable could guess. But notone word shall they have from me, and I bind you to secrecy also, Dr.Watson. Not a word! You understand!"
"Just as you wish."
"They have treated me shamefully--shamefully. When the facts come outin Frankland v. Regina I venture to think that a thrill ofindignation will run through the country. Nothing would induce me tohelp the police in any way. For all they cared it might have been me,instead of my effigy, which these rascals burned at the stake. Surelyyou are not going! You will help me to empty the decanter in honourof this great occasion!"
But I resisted all his solicitations and succeeded in dissuading himfrom his announced intention of walking home with me. I kept the roadas long as his eye was on me, and then I struck off across the moorand made for the stony hill over which the boy had disappeared.Everything was working in my favour, and I swore that it should notbe through lack of energy or perseverance that I should miss thechance which fortune had thrown in my way.
The sun was already sinking when I reached the summit of the hill,and the long slopes beneath me were all golden-green on one side andgray shadow on the other. A haze lay low upon the farthest sky-line,out of which jutted the fantastic shapes of Belliver and Vixen Tor.Over the wide expanse there was no sound and no movement. One greatgray bird, a gull or curlew, soared aloft in the blue heaven. He andI seemed to be the only living things between the huge arch of thesky and the desert beneath it. The barren scene, the sense ofloneliness, and the mystery and urgency of my task all struck a chillinto my heart. The boy was nowhere to be seen. But down beneath me ina cleft of the hills there was a circle of the old stone huts, and inthe middle of them there was one which retained sufficient roof toact as a screen against the weather. My heart leaped within me as Isaw it. This must be the burrow where the stranger lurked. At last myfoot was on the threshold of his hiding place--his secret was withinmy grasp.
As I approached the hut, walking as warily as Stapleton would do whenwith poised net he drew near the settled butterfly, I satisfiedmyself that the place had indeed been used as a habitation. A vaguepathway among the boulders led to the dilapidated opening whichserved as a door. All was silent within. The unknown might be lurkingthere, or he might be prowling on the moor. My nerves tingled withthe sense of adventure. Throwing aside my cigarette, I closed my handupon the butt of my revolver and, walking swiftly up to the door, Ilooked in. The place was empty.
But there were ample signs that I had not come upon a false scent.This was certainly where the man lived. Some blankets rolled in awaterproof lay upon that very stone slab upon which Neolithic man hadonce slumbered. The ashes of a fire were heaped in a rude grate.Beside it lay some cooking utensils and a bucket half-full of water.A litter of empty tins showed that the place had been occupied forsome time, and I saw, as my eyes became accustomed to the checkeredlight, a pannikin and a half-full bottle of spirits standing in thecorner. In the middle of the hut a flat stone served the purpose of atable, and upon this stood a small cloth bundle--the same, no doubt,which I had seen through the telescope upon the shoulder of the boy.It contained a loaf of bread, a tinned tongue, and two tins ofpreserved peaches. As I set it down again, after having examined it,my heart leaped to see that beneath it there lay a sheet of paperwith writing upon it. I raised it, and this was what I read, roughlyscrawled in pencil:--
Dr. Watson has gone to Coombe Tracey.
For a minute I stood there with the paper in my hands thinking outthe meaning of this curt message. It was I, then, and not Sir Henry,who was being dogged by this secret man. He had not followed mehimself, but he had set an agent--the boy, perhaps--upon my track,and this was his report. Possibly I had taken no step since I hadbeen upon the moor which had not been observed and reported. Alwaysthere was this feeling of an unseen force, a fine net drawn round uswith infinite skill and delicacy, holding us so lightly that it wasonly at some supreme moment that one realized that one was indeedentangled in its meshes.
If there was one report there might be others, so I looked round thehut in search of them. There was no trace, however, of anything ofthe kind, nor could I discover any sign which might indicate thecharacter or intentions of the man who lived in this singular place,save that he must be of Spartan habits and cared little for thecomforts of life. When I thought of the heavy rains and looked at thegaping roof I understood how strong and immutable must be the purposewhich had kept him in that inhospitable abode. Was he our malignantenemy, or was he by chance our guardian angel? I swore that I wouldnot leave the hut until I knew.
Outside the sun was sinking low and the west was blazing with scarletand gold. Its reflection was shot back in ruddy patches by thedistant pools which lay amid the great Grimpen Mire. There were thetwo towers of Baskerville Hall, and there a distant blur of smokewhich marked the village of Grimpen. Between the two, behind thehill, was the house of the Stapletons. All was sweet and mellow andpeaceful in the golden evening light, and yet as I looked at them mysoul shared none of the peace of nature but quivered at the vaguenessand the terror of that interview which every instant was bringingnearer. With tingling nerves, but a fixed purpose, I sat in the darkrecess of the hut and waited with sombre patience for the coming ofits tenant.
And then at last I heard him. Far away came the sharp clink of a bootstriking upon a stone. Then another and yet another, coming nearerand nearer. I shrank back into the darkest corner, and cocked thepistol in my pocket, determined not to discover myself until I had anopportunity of seeing something of the stranger. There was a longpause which showed that he had stopped. Then once more the footstepsapproached and a shadow fell across the opening of the hut.
"It is a lovely evening, my dear Watson," said a well-known voice. "Ireally think that you will be more comfortable outside than in."




     CHAPTER XII     Death on the Moor

For a moment or two I sat breathless, hardly able to believe my ears.Then my senses and my voice came back to me, while a crushing weightof responsibility seemed in an instant to be lifted from my soul.That cold, incisive, ironical voice could belong to but one man inall the world.
"Holmes!" I cried--"Holmes!"
"Come out," said he, "and please be careful with the revolver."
I stooped under the rude lintel, and there he sat upon a stoneoutside, his gray eyes dancing with amusement as they fell upon myastonished features. He was thin and worn, but clear and alert, hiskeen face bronzed by the sun and roughened by the wind. In his tweedsuit and cloth cap he looked like any other tourist upon the moor,and he had contrived, with that cat-like love of personal cleanlinesswhich was one of his characteristics, that his chin should be assmooth and his linen as perfect as if he were in Baker Street.
"I never was more glad to see anyone in my life," said I, as I wrunghim by the hand.
"Or more astonished, eh?"
"Well, I must confess to it."
"The surprise was not all on one side, I assure you. I had no ideathat you had found my occasional retreat, still less that you wereinside it, until I was within twenty paces of the door."
"My footprint, I presume?"
"No, Watson; I fear that I could not undertake to recognize yourfootprint amid all the footprints of the world. If you seriouslydesire to deceive me you must change your tobacconist; for when I seethe stub of a cigarette marked Bradley, Oxford Street, I know that myfriend Watson is in the neighbourhood. You will see it there besidethe path. You threw it down, no doubt, at that supreme moment whenyou charged into the empty hut."
"Exactly."
"I thought as much--and knowing your admirable tenacity I wasconvinced that you were sitting in ambush, a weapon within reach,waiting for the tenant to return. So you actually thought that I wasthe criminal?"
"I did not know who you were, but I was determined to find out."
"Excellent, Watson! And how did you localize me? You saw me, perhaps,on the night of the convict hunt, when I was so imprudent as to allowthe moon to rise behind me?"
"Yes, I saw you then."
"And have no doubt searched all the huts until you came to this one?"
"No, your boy had been observed, and that gave me a guide where tolook."
"The old gentleman with the telescope, no doubt. I could not make itout when first I saw the light flashing upon the lens." He rose andpeeped into the hut. "Ha, I see that Cartwright has brought up somesupplies. What's this paper? So you have been to Coombe Tracey, haveyou?"
"Yes."
"To see Mrs. Laura Lyons?"
"Exactly."
"Well done! Our researches have evidently been running on parallellines, and when we unite our results I expect we shall have a fairlyfull knowledge of the case."
"Well, I am glad from my heart that you are here, for indeed theresponsibility and the mystery were both becoming too much for mynerves. But how in the name of wonder did you come here, and whathave you been doing? I thought that you were in Baker Street workingout that case of blackmailing."
"That was what I wished you to think."
"Then you use me, and yet do not trust me!" I cried with somebitterness. "I think that I have deserved better at your hands,Holmes."
"My dear fellow, you have been invaluable to me in this as in manyother cases, and I beg that you will forgive me if I have seemed toplay a trick upon you. In truth, it was partly for your own sake thatI did it, and it was my appreciation of the danger which you ranwhich led me to come down and examine the matter for myself. Had Ibeen with Sir Henry and you it is confident that my point of viewwould have been the same as yours, and my presence would have warnedour very formidable opponents to be on their guard. As it is, I havebeen able to get about as I could not possibly have done had I beenliving in the Hall, and I remain an unknown factor in the business,ready to throw in all my weight at a critical moment."
"But why keep me in the dark?"
"For you to know could not have helped us, and might possibly haveled to my discovery. You would have wished to tell me something, orin your kindness you would have brought me out some comfort or other,and so an unnecessary risk would be run. I brought Cartwright downwith me--you remember the little chap at the express office--and hehas seen after my simple wants: a loaf of bread and a clean collar.What does man want more? He has given me an extra pair of eyes upon avery active pair of feet, and both have been invaluable."
"Then my reports have all been wasted!"--My voice trembled as Irecalled the pains and the pride with which I had composed them.
Holmes took a bundle of papers from his pocket.
"Here are your reports, my dear fellow, and very well thumbed, Iassure you. I made excellent arrangements, and they are only delayedone day upon their way. I must compliment you exceedingly upon thezeal and the intelligence which you have shown over anextraordinarily difficult case."
I was still rather raw over the deception which had been practisedupon me, but the warmth of Holmes's praise drove my anger from mymind. I felt also in my heart that he was right in what he said andthat it was really best for our purpose that I should not have knownthat he was upon the moor.
"That's better," said he, seeing the shadow rise from my face. "Andnow tell me the result of your visit to Mrs. Laura Lyons--it was notdifficult for me to guess that it was to see her that you had gone,for I am already aware that she is the one person in Coombe Traceywho might be of service to us in the matter. In fact, if you had notgone to-day it is exceedingly probable that I should have goneto-morrow."
The sun had set and dusk was settling over the moor. The air hadturned chill and we withdrew into the hut for warmth. There, sittingtogether in the twilight, I told Holmes of my conversation with thelady. So interested was he that I had to repeat some of it twicebefore he was satisfied.
"This is most important," said he when I had concluded. "It fills upa gap which I had been unable to bridge, in this most complex affair.You are aware, perhaps, that a close intimacy exists between thislady and the man Stapleton?"
"I did not know of a close intimacy."
"There can be no doubt about the matter. They meet, they write, thereis a complete understanding between them. Now, this puts a verypowerful weapon into our hands. If I could only use it to detach hiswife--"
"His wife?"
"I am giving you some information now, in return for all that youhave given me. The lady who has passed here as Miss Stapleton is inreality his wife."
"Good heavens, Holmes! Are you sure of what you say? How could hehave permitted Sir Henry to fall in love with her?"
"Sir Henry's falling in love could do no harm to anyone except SirHenry. He took particular care that Sir Henry did not make love toher, as you have yourself observed. I repeat that the lady is hiswife and not his sister."
"But why this elaborate deception?"
"Because he foresaw that she would be very much more useful to him inthe character of a free woman."
All my unspoken instincts, my vague suspicions, suddenly took shapeand centred upon the naturalist. In that impassive, colourless man,with his straw hat and his butterfly-net, I seemed to see somethingterrible--a creature of infinite patience and craft, with a smilingface and a murderous heart.
"It is he, then, who is our enemy--it is he who dogged us in London?"
"So I read the riddle."
"And the warning--it must have come from her!"
"Exactly."
The shape of some monstrous villainy, half seen, half guessed, loomedthrough the darkness which had girt me so long.
"But are you sure of this, Holmes? How do you know that the woman ishis wife?"
"Because he so far forgot himself as to tell you a true piece ofautobiography upon the occasion when he first met you, and I dare sayhe has many a time regretted it since. He was once a schoolmaster inthe north of England. Now, there is no one more easy to trace than aschoolmaster. There are scholastic agencies by which one may identifyany man who has been in the profession. A little investigation showedme that a school had come to grief under atrocious circumstances, andthat the man who had owned it--the name was different--haddisappeared with his wife. The descriptions agreed. When I learnedthat the missing man was devoted to entomology the identification wascomplete."
The darkness was rising, but much was still hidden by the shadows.
"If this woman is in truth his wife, where does Mrs. Laura Lyons comein?" I asked.
"That is one of the points upon which your own researches have shed alight. Your interview with the lady has cleared the situation verymuch. I did not know about a projected divorce between herself andher husband. In that case, regarding Stapleton as an unmarried man,she counted no doubt upon becoming his wife."
"And when she is undeceived?"
"Why, then we may find the lady of service. It must be our first dutyto see her--both of us--to-morrow. Don't you think, Watson, that youare away from your charge rather long? Your place should be atBaskerville Hall."
The last red streaks had faded away in the west and night had settledupon the moor. A few faint stars were gleaming in a violet sky.
"One last question, Holmes," I said, as I rose. "Surely there is noneed of secrecy between you and me. What is the meaning of it all?What is he after?"
Holmes's voice sank as he answered:--
"It is murder, Watson--refined, cold-blooded, deliberate murder. Donot ask me for particulars. My nets are closing upon him, even as hisare upon Sir Henry, and with your help he is already almost at mymercy. There is but one danger which can threaten us. It is that heshould strike before we are ready to do so. Another day--two at themost--and I have my case complete, but until then guard your chargeas closely as ever a fond mother watched her ailing child. Yourmission to-day has justified itself, and yet I could almost wish thatyou had not left his side. Hark!"
A terrible scream--a prolonged yell of horror and anguish--burst outof the silence of the moor. That frightful cry turned the blood toice in my veins.
"Oh, my God!" I gasped. "What is it? What does it mean?"
Holmes had sprung to his feet, and I saw his dark, athletic outlineat the door of the hut, his shoulders stooping, his head thrustforward, his face peering into the darkness.
"Hush!" he whispered. "Hush!"
The cry had been loud on account of its vehemence, but it had pealedout from somewhere far off on the shadowy plain. Now it burst uponour ears, nearer, louder, more urgent than before.
"Where is it?" Holmes whispered; and I knew from the thrill of hisvoice that he, the man of iron, was shaken to the soul. "Where is it,Watson?"
"There, I think." I pointed into the darkness.
"No, there!"
Again the agonized cry swept through the silent night, louder andmuch nearer than ever. And a new sound mingled with it, a deep,muttered rumble, musical and yet menacing, rising and falling likethe low, constant murmur of the sea.
"The hound!" cried Holmes. "Come, Watson, come! Great heavens, if weare too late!"
He had started running swiftly over the moor, and I had followed athis heels. But now from somewhere among the broken ground immediatelyin front of us there came one last despairing yell, and then a dull,heavy thud. We halted and listened. Not another sound broke the heavysilence of the windless night.
I saw Holmes put his hand to his forehead like a man distracted. Hestamped his feet upon the ground.
"He has beaten us, Watson. We are too late."
"No, no, surely not!"
"Fool that I was to hold my hand. And you, Watson, see what comes ofabandoning your charge! But, by Heaven, if the worst has happened,we'll avenge him!"
Blindly we ran through the gloom, blundering against boulders,forcing our way through gorse bushes, panting up hills and rushingdown slopes, heading always in the direction whence those dreadfulsounds had come. At every rise Holmes looked eagerly round him, butthe shadows were thick upon the moor, and nothing moved upon itsdreary face.
"Can you see anything?"
"Nothing."
"But, hark, what is that?"
A low moan had fallen upon our ears. There it was again upon ourleft! On that side a ridge of rocks ended in a sheer cliff whichoverlooked a stone-strewn slope. On its jagged face was spread-eagledsome dark, irregular object. As we ran towards it the vague outlinehardened into a definite shape. It was a prostrate man face downwardupon the ground, the head doubled under him at a horrible angle, theshoulders rounded and the body hunched together as if in the act ofthrowing a somersault. So grotesque was the attitude that I could notfor the instant realize that that moan had been the passing of hissoul. Not a whisper, not a rustle, rose now from the dark figure overwhich we stooped. Holmes laid his hand upon him, and held it upagain, with an exclamation of horror. The gleam of the match which hestruck shone upon his clotted fingers and upon the ghastly pool whichwidened slowly from the crushed skull of the victim. And it shoneupon something else which turned our hearts sick and faint withinus--the body of Sir Henry Baskerville!
There was no chance of either of us forgetting that peculiar ruddytweed suit--the very one which he had worn on the first morning thatwe had seen him in Baker Street. We caught the one clear glimpse ofit, and then the match flickered and went out, even as the hope hadgone out of our souls. Holmes groaned, and his face glimmered whitethrough the darkness.
"The brute! the brute!" I cried with clenched hands. "Oh Holmes, Ishall never forgive myself for having left him to his fate."
"I am more to blame than you, Watson. In order to have my case wellrounded and complete, I have thrown away the life of my client. It isthe greatest blow which has befallen me in my career. But how could Iknow--how could l know--that he would risk his life alone upon themoor in the face of all my warnings?"
"That we should have heard his screams--my God, those screams!--andyet have been unable to save him! Where is this brute of a houndwhich drove him to his death? It may be lurking among these rocks atthis instant. And Stapleton, where is he? He shall answer for thisdeed."
"He shall. I will see to that. Uncle and nephew have beenmurdered--the one frightened to death by the very sight of a beastwhich he thought to be supernatural, the other driven to his end inhis wild flight to escape from it. But now we have to prove theconnection between the man and the beast. Save from what we heard, wecannot even swear to the existence of the latter, since Sir Henry hasevidently died from the fall. But, by heavens, cunning as he is, thefellow shall be in my power before another day is past!"
We stood with bitter hearts on either side of the mangled body,overwhelmed by this sudden and irrevocable disaster which had broughtall our long and weary labours to so piteous an end. Then, as themoon rose we climbed to the top of the rocks over which our poorfriend had fallen, and from the summit we gazed out over the shadowymoor, half silver and half gloom. Far away, miles off, in thedirection of Grimpen, a single steady yellow light was shining. Itcould only come from the lonely abode of the Stapletons. With abitter curse I shook my fist at it as I gazed.
"Why should we not seize him at once?"
"Our case is not complete. The fellow is wary and cunning to the lastdegree. It is not what we know, but what we can prove. If we make onefalse move the villain may escape us yet."
"What can we do?"
"There will be plenty for us to do to-morrow. To-night we can onlyperform the last offices to our poor friend."
Together we made our way down the precipitous slope and approachedthe body, black and clear against the silvered stones. The agony ofthose contorted limbs struck me with a spasm of pain and blurred myeyes with tears.
"We must send for help, Holmes! We cannot carry him all the way tothe Hall. Good heavens, are you mad?"
He had uttered a cry and bent over the body. Now he was dancing andlaughing and wringing my hand. Could this be my stern, self-containedfriend? These were hidden fires, indeed!
"A beard! A beard! The man has a beard!"
"A beard?"
"It is not the baronet--it is--why, it is my neighbour, the convict!"
With feverish haste we had turned the body over, and that drippingbeard was pointing up to the cold, clear moon. There could be nodoubt about the beetling forehead, the sunken animal eyes. It wasindeed the same face which had glared upon me in the light of thecandle from over the rock--the face of Selden, the criminal.
Then in an instant it was all clear to me. I remembered how thebaronet had told me that he had handed his old wardrobe to Barrymore.Barrymore had passed it on in order to help Selden in his escape.Boots, shirt, cap--it was all Sir Henry's. The tragedy was stillblack enough, but this man had at least deserved death by the laws ofhis country. I told Holmes how the matter stood, my heart bubblingover with thankfulness and joy.
"Then the clothes have been the poor devil's death," said he. "It isclear enough that the hound has been laid on from some article of SirHenry's--the boot which was abstracted in the hotel, in allprobability--and so ran this man down. There is one very singularthing, however: How came Selden, in the darkness, to know that thehound was on his trail?"
"He heard him."
"To hear a hound upon the moor would not work a hard man like thisconvict into such a paroxysm of terror that he would risk recaptureby screaming wildly for help. By his cries he must have run a longway after he knew the animal was on his track. How did he know?"
"A greater mystery to me is why this hound, presuming that all ourconjectures are correct--"
"I presume nothing."
"Well, then, why this hound should be loose to-night. I suppose thatit does not always run loose upon the moor. Stapleton would not letit go unless he had reason to think that Sir Henry would be there."
"My difficulty is the more formidable of the two, for I think that weshall very shortly get an explanation of yours, while mine may remainforever a mystery. The question now is, what shall we do with thispoor wretch's body? We cannot leave it here to the foxes and theravens."
"I suggest that we put it in one of the huts until we can communicatewith the police."
"Exactly. I have no doubt that you and I could carry it so far.Halloa, Watson, what's this? It's the man himself, by all that'swonderful and audacious! Not a word to show your suspicions--not aword, or my plans crumble to the ground."
A figure was approaching us over the moor, and I saw the dull redglow of a cigar. The moon shone upon him, and I could distinguish thedapper shape and jaunty walk of the naturalist. He stopped when hesaw us, and then came on again.
"Why, Dr. Watson, that's not you, is it? You are the last man that Ishould have expected to see out on the moor at this time of night.But, dear me, what's this? Somebody hurt? Not--don't tell me that itis our friend Sir Henry!" He hurried past me and stooped over thedead man. I heard a sharp intake of his breath and the cigar fellfrom his fingers.
"Who--who's this?" he stammered.
"It is Selden, the man who escaped from Princetown."
Stapleton turned a ghastly face upon us, but by a supreme effort hehad overcome his amazement and his disappointment. He looked sharplyfrom Holmes to me.
"Dear me! What a very shocking affair! How did he die?"
"He appears to have broken his neck by falling over these rocks. Myfriend and I were strolling on the moor when we heard a cry."
"I heard a cry also. That was what brought me out. I was uneasy aboutSir Henry."
"Why about Sir Henry in particular?" I could not help asking.
"Because I had suggested that he should come over. When he did notcome I was surprised, and I naturally became alarmed for his safetywhen I heard cries upon the moor. By the way"--his eyes darted againfrom my face to Holmes's--"did you hear anything else besides a cry?"
"No," said Holmes; "did you?"
"No."
"What do you mean, then?"
"Oh, you know the stories that the peasants tell about a phantomhound, and so on. It is said to be heard at night upon the moor. Iwas wondering if there were any evidence of such a sound to-night."
"We heard nothing of the kind," said I.
"And what is your theory of this poor fellow's death?"
"I have no doubt that anxiety and exposure have driven him off hishead. He has rushed about the moor in a crazy state and eventuallyfallen over here and broken his neck."
"That seems the most reasonable theory," said Stapleton, and he gavea sigh which I took to indicate his relief. "What do you think aboutit, Mr. Sherlock Holmes?"
My friend bowed his compliments.
"You are quick at identification," said he.
"We have been expecting you in these parts since Dr. Watson camedown. You are in time to see a tragedy."
"Yes, indeed. I have no doubt that my friend's explanation will coverthe facts. I will take an unpleasant remembrance back to London withme to-morrow."
"Oh, you return to-morrow?"
"That is my intention."
"I hope your visit has cast some light upon those occurrences whichhave puzzled us?"
Holmes shrugged his shoulders.
"One cannot always have the success for which one hopes. Aninvestigator needs facts, and not legends or rumours. It has not beena satisfactory case."
My friend spoke in his frankest and most unconcerned manner.Stapleton still looked hard at him. Then he turned to me.
"I would suggest carrying this poor fellow to my house, but it wouldgive my sister such a fright that I do not feel justified in doingit. I think that if we put something over his face he will be safeuntil morning."
And so it was arranged. Resisting Stapleton's offer of hospitality,Holmes and I set off to Baskerville Hall, leaving the naturalist toreturn alone. Looking back we saw the figure moving slowly away overthe broad moor, and behind him that one black smudge on the silveredslope which showed where the man was lying who had come so horriblyto his end.




     CHAPTER XIII     Fixing the Nets

"We're at close grips at last," said Holmes as we walked togetheracross the moor. "What a nerve the fellow has! How he pulled himselftogether in the face of what must have been a paralyzing shock whenhe found that the wrong man had fallen a victim to his plot. I toldyou in London, Watson, and I tell you now again, that we have neverhad a foeman more worthy of our steel."
"I am sorry that he has seen you."
"And so was I at first. But there was no getting out of it."
"What effect do you think it will have upon his plans now that heknows you are here?"
"It may cause him to be more cautious, or it may drive him todesperate measures at once. Like most clever criminals, he may be tooconfident in his own cleverness and imagine that he has completelydeceived us."
"Why should we not arrest him at once?"
"My dear Watson, you were born to be a man of action. Your instinctis always to do something energetic. But supposing, for argument'ssake, that we had him arrested to-night, what on earth the better offshould we be for that? We could prove nothing against him. There'sthe devilish cunning of it! If he were acting through a human agentwe could get some evidence, but if we were to drag this great dog tothe light of day it would not help us in putting a rope round theneck of its master."
"Surely we have a case."
"Not a shadow of one--only surmise and conjecture. We should belaughed out of court if we came with such a story and such evidence."
"There is Sir Charles's death."
"Found dead without a mark upon him. You and I know that he died ofsheer fright, and we know also what frightened him; but how are we toget twelve stolid jurymen to know it? What signs are there of ahound? Where are the marks of its fangs? Of course we know that ahound does not bite a dead body and that Sir Charles was dead beforeever the brute overtook him. But we have to prove all this, and weare not in a position to do it."
"Well, then, to-night?"
"We are not much better off to-night. Again, there was no directconnection between the hound and the man's death. We never saw thehound. We heard it; but we could not prove that it was running uponthis man's trail. There is a complete absence of motive. No, my dearfellow; we must reconcile ourselves to the fact that we have no caseat present, and that it is worth our while to run any risk in orderto establish one."
"And how do you propose to do so?"
"I have great hopes of what Mrs. Laura Lyons may do for us when theposition of affairs is made clear to her. And I have my own plan aswell. Sufficient for to-morrow is the evil thereof; but I hope beforethe day is past to have the upper hand at last."
I could draw nothing further from him, and he walked, lost inthought, as far as the Baskerville gates.
"Are you coming up?"
"Yes; I see no reason for further concealment. But one last word,Watson. Say nothing of the hound to Sir Henry. Let him think thatSelden's death was as Stapleton would have us believe. He will have abetter nerve for the ordeal which he will have to undergo to-morrow,when he is engaged, if I remember your report aright, to dine withthese people."
"And so am I."
"Then you must excuse yourself and he must go alone. That will beeasily arranged. And now, if we are too late for dinner, I think thatwe are both ready for our suppers."
Sir Henry was more pleased than surprised to see Sherlock Holmes, forhe had for some days been expecting that recent events would bringhim down from London. He did raise his eyebrows, however, when hefound that my friend had neither any luggage nor any explanations forits absence. Between us we soon supplied his wants, and then over abelated supper we explained to the baronet as much of our experienceas it seemed desirable that he should know. But first I had theunpleasant duty of breaking the news to Barrymore and his wife. Tohim it may have been an unmitigated relief, but she wept bitterly inher apron. To all the world he was the man of violence, half animaland half demon; but to her he always remained the little wilful boyof her own girlhood, the child who had clung to her hand. Evil indeedis the man who has not one woman to mourn him.
"I've been moping in the house all day since Watson went off in themorning," said the baronet. "I guess I should have some credit, for Ihave kept my promise. If I hadn't sworn not to go about alone I mighthave had a more lively evening, for I had a message from Stapletonasking me over there."
"I have no doubt that you would have had a more lively evening," saidHolmes drily. "By the way, I don't suppose you appreciate that wehave been mourning over you as having broken your neck?"
Sir Henry opened his eyes. "How was that?"
"This poor wretch was dressed in your clothes. I fear your servantwho gave them to him may get into trouble with the police."
"That is unlikely. There was no mark on any of them, as far as Iknow."
"That's lucky for him--in fact, it's lucky for all of you, since youare all on the wrong side of the law in this matter. I am not surethat as a conscientious detective my first duty is not to arrest thewhole household. Watson's reports are most incriminating documents."
"But how about the case?" asked the baronet. "Have you made anythingout of the tangle? I don't know that Watson and I are much the wisersince we came down."
"I think that I shall be in a position to make the situation rathermore clear to you before long. It has been an exceedingly difficultand most complicated business. There are several points upon which westill want light--but it is coming all the same."
"We've had one experience, as Watson has no doubt told you. We heardthe hound on the moor, so I can swear that it is not all emptysuperstition. I had something to do with dogs when I was out West,and I know one when I hear one. If you can muzzle that one and puthim on a chain I'll be ready to swear you are the greatest detectiveof all time."
"I think I will muzzle him and chain him all right if you will giveme your help."
"Whatever you tell me to do I will do."
"Very good; and I will ask you also to do it blindly, without alwaysasking the reason."
"Just as you like."
"If you will do this I think the chances are that our little problemwill soon be solved. I have no doubt--"
He stopped suddenly and stared fixedly up over my head into the air.The lamp beat upon his face, and so intent was it and so still thatit might have been that of a clear-cut classical statue, apersonification of alertness and expectation.
"What is it?" we both cried.
I could see as he looked down that he was repressing some internalemotion. His features were still composed, but his eyes shone withamused exultation.
"Excuse the admiration of a connoisseur," said he as he waved hishand towards the line of portraits which covered the opposite wall."Watson won't allow that I know anything of art, but that is merejealousy, because our views upon the subject differ. Now, these are areally very fine series of portraits."
"Well, I'm glad to hear you say so," said Sir Henry, glancing withsome surprise at my friend. "I don't pretend to know much about thesethings, and I'd be a better judge of a horse or a steer than of apicture. I didn't know that you found time for such things."
"I know what is good when I see it, and I see it now. That's aKneller, I'll swear, that lady in the blue silk over yonder, and thestout gentleman with the wig ought to be a Reynolds. They are allfamily portraits, I presume?"
"Every one."
"Do you know the names?"
"Barrymore has been coaching me in them, and I think I can say mylessons fairly well."
"Who is the gentleman with the telescope?"
"That is Rear-Admiral Baskerville, who served under Rodney in theWest Indies. The man with the blue coat and the roll of paper is SirWilliam Baskerville, who was Chairman of Committees of the House ofCommons under Pitt."
"And this Cavalier opposite to me--the one with the black velvet andthe lace?"
"Ah, you have a right to know about him. That is the cause of all themischief, the wicked Hugo, who started the Hound of the Baskervilles.We're not likely to forget him."
I gazed with interest and some surprise upon the portrait.
"Dear me!" said Holmes, "he seems a quiet, meek-mannered man enough,but I dare say that there was a lurking devil in his eyes. I hadpictured him as a more robust and ruffianly person."
"There's no doubt about the authenticity, for the name and the date,1647, are on the back of the canvas."
Holmes said little more, but the picture of the old roysterer seemedto have a fascination for him, and his eyes were continually fixedupon it during supper. It was not until later, when Sir Henry hadgone to his room, that I was able to follow the trend of histhoughts. He led me back into the banqueting-hall, his bedroom candlein his hand, and he held it up against the time-stained portrait onthe wall.
"Do you see anything there?"
I looked at the broad plumed hat, the curling love-locks, the whitelace collar, and the straight, severe face which was framed betweenthem. It was not a brutal countenance, but it was prim, hard, andstern, with a firm-set, thin-lipped mouth, and a coldly intoleranteye.
"Is it like anyone you know?"
"There is something of Sir Henry about the jaw."
"Just a suggestion, perhaps. But wait an instant!" He stood upon achair, and, holding up the light in his left hand, he curved hisright arm over the broad hat and round the long ringlets.
"Good heavens!" I cried, in amazement.
The face of Stapleton had sprung out of the canvas.
"Ha, you see it now. My eyes have been trained to examine faces andnot their trimmings. It is the first quality of a criminalinvestigator that he should see through a disguise."
"But this is marvellous. It might be his portrait."
"Yes, it is an interesting instance of a throwback, which appears tobe both physical and spiritual. A study of family portraits is enoughto convert a man to the doctrine of reincarnation. The fellow is aBaskerville--that is evident."
"With designs upon the succession."
"Exactly. This chance of the picture has supplied us with one of ourmost obvious missing links. We have him, Watson, we have him, and Idare swear that before to-morrow night he will be fluttering in ournet as helpless as one of his own butterflies. A pin, a cork, and acard, and we add him to the Baker Street collection!" He burst intoone of his rare fits of laughter as he turned away from the picture.I have not heard him laugh often, and it has always boded ill tosomebody.
I was up betimes in the morning, but Holmes was afoot earlier still,for I saw him as I dressed, coming up the drive.
"Yes, we should have a full day to-day," he remarked, and he rubbedhis hands with the joy of action. "The nets are all in place, and thedrag is about to begin. We'll know before the day is out whether wehave caught our big, lean-jawed pike, or whether he has got throughthe meshes."
"Have you been on the moor already?"
"I have sent a report from Grimpen to Princetown as to the death ofSelden. I think I can promise that none of you will be troubled inthe matter. And I have also communicated with my faithful Cartwright,who would certainly have pined away at the door of my hut, as a dogdoes at his master's grave, if I had not set his mind at rest aboutmy safety."
"What is the next move?"
"To see Sir Henry. Ah, here he is!"
"Good morning, Holmes," said the baronet. "You look like a generalwho is planning a battle with his chief of the staff."
"That is the exact situation. Watson was asking for orders."
"And so do I."
"Very good. You are engaged, as I understand, to dine with ourfriends the Stapletons to-night."
"I hope that you will come also. They are very hospitable people, andI am sure that they would be very glad to see you."
"I fear that Watson and I must go to London."
"To London?"
"Yes, I think that we should be more useful there at the presentjuncture."
The baronet's face perceptibly lengthened.
"I hoped that you were going to see me through this business. TheHall and the moor are not very pleasant places when one is alone."
"My dear fellow, you must trust me implicitly and do exactly what Itell you. You can tell your friends that we should have been happy tohave come with you, but that urgent business required us to be intown. We hope very soon to return to Devonshire. Will you remember togive them that message?"
"If you insist upon it."
"There is no alternative, I assure you."
I saw by the baronet's clouded brow that he was deeply hurt by whathe regarded as our desertion.
"When do you desire to go?" he asked coldly.
"Immediately after breakfast. We will drive in to Coombe Tracey, butWatson will leave his things as a pledge that he will come back toyou. Watson, you will send a note to Stapleton to tell him that youregret that you cannot come."
"I have a good mind to go to London with you," said the baronet. "Whyshould I stay here alone?"
"Because it is your post of duty. Because you gave me your word thatyou would do as you were told, and I tell you to stay."
"All right, then, I'll stay."
"One more direction! I wish you to drive to Merripit House. Send backyour trap, however, and let them know that you intend to walk home."
"To walk across the moor?"
"Yes."
"But that is the very thing which you have so often cautioned me notto do."
"This time you may do it with safety. If I had not every confidencein your nerve and courage I would not suggest it, but it is essentialthat you should do it."
"Then I will do it."
"And as you value your life do not go across the moor in anydirection save along the straight path which leads from MerripitHouse to the Grimpen Road, and is your natural way home."
"I will do just what you say."
"Very good. I should be glad to get away as soon after breakfast aspossible, so as to reach London in the afternoon."
I was much astounded by this programme, though I remembered thatHolmes had said to Stapleton on the night before that his visit wouldterminate next day. It had not crossed my mind, however, that hewould wish me to go with him, nor could I understand how we couldboth be absent at a moment which he himself declared to be critical.There was nothing for it, however, but implicit obedience; so we badegood-bye to our rueful friend, and a couple of hours afterwards wewere at the station of Coombe Tracey and had dispatched the trap uponits return journey. A small boy was waiting upon the platform.
"Any orders, sir?"
"You will take this train to town, Cartwright. The moment you arriveyou will send a wire to Sir Henry Baskerville, in my name, to saythat if he finds the pocket-book which I have dropped he is to sendit by registered post to Baker Street."
"Yes, sir."
"And ask at the station office if there is a message for me."
The boy returned with a telegram, which Holmes handed to me. It ran:
Wire received. Coming down with unsigned warrant. Arrive five-forty.Lestrade.
"That is in answer to mine of this morning. He is the best of theprofessionals, I think, and we may need his assistance. Now, Watson,I think that we cannot employ our time better than by calling uponyour acquaintance, Mrs. Laura Lyons."
His plan of campaign was beginning to be evident. He would use thebaronet in order to convince the Stapletons that we were really gone,while we should actually return at the instant when we were likely tobe needed. That telegram from London, if mentioned by Sir Henry tothe Stapletons, must remove the last suspicions from their minds.Already I seemed to see our nets drawing closer around thatlean-jawed pike.
Mrs. Laura Lyons was in her office, and Sherlock Holmes opened hisinterview with a frankness and directness which considerably amazedher.
"I am investigating the circumstances which attended the death of thelate Sir Charles Baskerville," said he. "My friend here, Dr. Watson,has informed me of what you have communicated, and also of what youhave withheld in connection with that matter."
"What have I withheld?" she asked defiantly.
"You have confessed that you asked Sir Charles to be at the gate atten o'clock. We know that that was the place and hour of his death.You have withheld what the connection is between these events."
"There is no connection."
"In that case the coincidence must indeed be an extraordinary one.But I think that we shall succeed in establishing a connection afterall. I wish to be perfectly frank with you, Mrs. Lyons. We regardthis case as one of murder, and the evidence may implicate not onlyyour friend Mr. Stapleton, but his wife as well."
The lady sprang from her chair.
"His wife!" she cried.
"The fact is no longer a secret. The person who has passed for hissister is really his wife."
Mrs. Lyons had resumed her seat. Her hands were grasping the arms ofher chair, and I saw that the pink nails had turned white with thepressure of her grip.
"His wife!" she said again. "His wife! He is not a married man."
Sherlock Holmes shrugged his shoulders.
"Prove it to me! Prove it to me! And if you can do so--!" The fierceflash of her eyes said more than any words.
"I have come prepared to do so," said Holmes, drawing several papersfrom his pocket. "Here is a photograph of the couple taken in Yorkfour years ago. It is indorsed 'Mr. and Mrs. Vandeleur,' but you willhave no difficulty in recognizing him, and her also, if you know herby sight. Here are three written descriptions by trustworthywitnesses of Mr. and Mrs. Vandeleur, who at that time kept St.Oliver's private school. Read them and see if you can doubt theidentity of these people."
She glanced at them, and then looked up at us with the set, rigidface of a desperate woman.
"Mr. Holmes," she said, "this man had offered me marriage oncondition that I could get a divorce from my husband. He has lied tome, the villain, in every conceivable way. Not one word of truth hashe ever told me. And why--why? I imagined that all was for my ownsake. But now I see that I was never anything but a tool in hishands. Why should I preserve faith with him who never kept any withme? Why should I try to shield him from the consequences of his ownwicked acts? Ask me what you like, and there is nothing which I shallhold back. One thing I swear to you, and that is that when I wrotethe letter I never dreamed of any harm to the old gentleman, who hadbeen my kindest friend."
"I entirely believe you, madam," said Sherlock Holmes. "The recitalof these events must be very painful to you, and perhaps it will makeit easier if I tell you what occurred, and you can check me if I makeany material mistake. The sending of this letter was suggested to youby Stapleton?"
"He dictated it."
"I presume that the reason he gave was that you would receive helpfrom Sir Charles for the legal expenses connected with your divorce?"
"Exactly."
"And then after you had sent the letter he dissuaded you from keepingthe appointment?"
"He told me that it would hurt his self-respect that any other manshould find the money for such an object, and that though he was apoor man himself he would devote his last penny to removing theobstacles which divided us."
"He appears to be a very consistent character. And then you heardnothing until you read the reports of the death in the paper?"
"No."
"And he made you swear to say nothing about your appointment with SirCharles?"
"He did. He said that the death was a very mysterious one, and that Ishould certainly be suspected if the facts came out. He frightened meinto remaining silent."
"Quite so. But you had your suspicions?"
She hesitated and looked down.
"I knew him," she said. "But if he had kept faith with me I shouldalways have done so with him."
"I think that on the whole you have had a fortunate escape," saidSherlock Holmes. "You have had him in your power and he knew it, andyet you are alive. You have been walking for some months very near tothe edge of a precipice. We must wish you good-morning now, Mrs.Lyons, and it is probable that you will very shortly hear from usagain."
"Our case becomes rounded off, and difficulty after difficulty thinsaway in front of us," said Holmes as we stood waiting for the arrivalof the express from town. "I shall soon be in the position of beingable to put into a single connected narrative one of the mostsingular and sensational crimes of modern times. Students ofcriminology will remember the analogous incidents in Godno, in LittleRussia, in the year '66, and of course there are the Anderson murdersin North Carolina, but this case possesses some features which areentirely its own. Even now we have no clear case against this verywily man. But I shall be very much surprised if it is not clearenough before we go to bed this night."
The London express came roaring into the station, and a small, wirybulldog of a man had sprung from a first-class carriage. We all threeshook hands, and I saw at once from the reverential way in whichLestrade gazed at my companion that he had learned a good deal sincethe days when they had first worked together. I could well rememberthe scorn which the theories of the reasoner used then to excite inthe practical man.
"Anything good?" he asked.
"The biggest thing for years," said Holmes. "We have two hours beforewe need think of starting. I think we might employ it in getting somedinner and then, Lestrade, we will take the London fog out of yourthroat by giving you a breath of the pure night air of Dartmoor.Never been there? Ah, well, I don't suppose you will forget yourfirst visit."




     CHAPTER XIV     The Hound of the Baskervilles

One of Sherlock Holmes's defects--if, indeed, one may call it adefect--was that he was exceedingly loath to communicate his fullplans to any other person until the instant of their fulfilment.Partly it came no doubt from his own masterful nature, which loved todominate and surprise those who were around him. Partly also from hisprofessional caution, which urged him never to take any chances. Theresult, however, was very trying for those who were acting as hisagents and assistants. I had often suffered under it, but never moreso than during that long drive in the darkness. The great ordeal wasin front of us; at last we were about to make our final effort, andyet Holmes had said nothing, and I could only surmise what his courseof action would be. My nerves thrilled with anticipation when at lastthe cold wind upon our faces and the dark, void spaces on either sideof the narrow road told me that we were back upon the moor onceagain. Every stride of the horses and every turn of the wheels wastaking us nearer to our supreme adventure.
Our conversation was hampered by the presence of the driver of thehired wagonette, so that we were forced to talk of trivial matterswhen our nerves were tense with emotion and anticipation. It was arelief to me, after that unnatural restraint, when we at last passedFrankland's house and knew that we were drawing near to the Hall andto the scene of action. We did not drive up to the door but got downnear the gate of the avenue. The wagonette was paid off and orderedto return to Coombe Tracey forthwith, while we started to walk toMerripit House.
"Are you armed, Lestrade?"
The little detective smiled.
"As long as I have my trousers I have a hip-pocket, and as long as Ihave my hip-pocket I have something in it."
"Good! My friend and I are also ready for emergencies."
"You're mighty close about this affair, Mr. Holmes. What's the gamenow?"
"A waiting game."
"My word, it does not seem a very cheerful place," said the detectivewith a shiver, glancing round him at the gloomy slopes of the hilland at the huge lake of fog which lay over the Grimpen Mire. "I seethe lights of a house ahead of us."
"That is Merripit House and the end of our journey. I must requestyou to walk on tiptoe and not to talk above a whisper."
We moved cautiously along the track as if we were bound for thehouse, but Holmes halted us when we were about two hundred yards fromit.
"This will do," said he. "These rocks upon the right make anadmirable screen."
"We are to wait here?"
"Yes, we shall make our little ambush here. Get into this hollow,Lestrade. You have been inside the house, have you not, Watson? Canyou tell the position of the rooms? What are those latticed windowsat this end?"
"I think they are the kitchen windows."
"And the one beyond, which shines so brightly?"
"That is certainly the dining-room."
"The blinds are up. You know the lie of the land best. Creep forwardquietly and see what they are doing--but for heaven's sake don't letthem know that they are watched!"
I tiptoed down the path and stooped behind the low wall whichsurrounded the stunted orchard. Creeping in its shadow I reached apoint whence I could look straight through the uncurtained window.
There were only two men in the room, Sir Henry and Stapleton. Theysat with their profiles towards me on either side of the round table.Both of them were smoking cigars, and coffee and wine were in frontof them. Stapleton was talking with animation, but the baronet lookedpale and distrait. Perhaps the thought of that lonely walk across theill-omened moor was weighing heavily upon his mind.
As I watched them Stapleton rose and left the room, while Sir Henryfilled his glass again and leaned back in his chair, puffing at hiscigar. I heard the creak of a door and the crisp sound of boots upongravel. The steps passed along the path on the other side of the wallunder which I crouched. Looking over, I saw the naturalist pause atthe door of an out-house in the corner of the orchard. A key turnedin a lock, and as he passed in there was a curious scuffling noisefrom within. He was only a minute or so inside, and then I heard thekey turn once more and he passed me and re-entered the house. I sawhim rejoin his guest, and I crept quietly back to where my companionswere waiting to tell them what I had seen.
"You say, Watson, that the lady is not there?" Holmes asked, when Ihad finished my report.
"No."
"Where can she be, then, since there is no light in any other roomexcept the kitchen?"
"I cannot think where she is."
I have said that over the great Grimpen Mire there hung a dense,white fog. It was drifting slowly in our direction, and banked itselfup like a wall on that side of us, low, but thick and well defined.The moon shone on it, and it looked like a great shimmeringice-field, with the heads of the distant tors as rocks borne upon itssurface. Holmes's face was turned towards it, and he mutteredimpatiently as he watched its sluggish drift.
"It's moving towards us, Watson."
"Is that serious?"
"Very serious, indeed--the one thing upon earth which could havedisarranged my plans. He can't be very long, now. It is already teno'clock. Our success and even his life may depend upon his coming outbefore the fog is over the path."
The night was clear and fine above us. The stars shone cold andbright, while a half-moon bathed the whole scene in a soft, uncertainlight. Before us lay the dark bulk of the house, its serrated roofand bristling chimneys hard outlined against the silver-spangled sky.Broad bars of golden light from the lower windows stretched acrossthe orchard and the moor. One of them was suddenly shut off. Theservants had left the kitchen. There only remained the lamp in thedining-room where the two men, the murderous host and the unconsciousguest, still chatted over their cigars.
Every minute that white woolly plain which covered one half of themoor was drifting closer and closer to the house. Already the firstthin wisps of it were curling across the golden square of the lightedwindow. The farther wall of the orchard was already invisible, andthe trees were standing out of a swirl of white vapour. As we watchedit the fog-wreaths came crawling round both corners of the house androlled slowly into one dense bank, on which the upper floor and theroof floated like a strange ship upon a shadowy sea. Holmes struckhis hand passionately upon the rock in front of us and stamped hisfeet in his impatience.
"If he isn't out in a quarter of an hour the path will be covered. Inhalf an hour we won't be able to see our hands in front of us."
"Shall we move farther back upon higher ground?"
"Yes, I think it would be as well."
So as the fog-bank flowed onward we fell back before it until we werehalf a mile from the house, and still that dense white sea, with themoon silvering its upper edge, swept slowly and inexorably on.
"We are going too far," said Holmes. "We dare not take the chance ofhis being overtaken before he can reach us. At all costs we must holdour ground where we are." He dropped on his knees and clapped his earto the ground. "Thank God, I think that I hear him coming."
A sound of quick steps broke the silence of the moor. Crouching amongthe stones we stared intently at the silver-tipped bank in front ofus. The steps grew louder, and through the fog, as through a curtain,there stepped the man whom we were awaiting. He looked round him insurprise as he emerged into the clear, starlit night. Then he cameswiftly along the path, passed close to where we lay, and went on upthe long slope behind us. As he walked he glanced continually overeither shoulder, like a man who is ill at ease.
"Hist!" cried Holmes, and I heard the sharp click of a cockingpistol. "Look out! It's coming!"
There was a thin, crisp, continuous patter from somewhere in theheart of that crawling bank. The cloud was within fifty yards ofwhere we lay, and we glared at it, all three, uncertain what horrorwas about to break from the heart of it. I was at Holmes's elbow, andI glanced for an instant at his face. It was pale and exultant, hiseyes shining brightly in the moonlight. But suddenly they startedforward in a rigid, fixed stare, and his lips parted in amazement. Atthe same instant Lestrade gave a yell of terror and threw himselfface downward upon the ground. I sprang to my feet, my inert handgrasping my pistol, my mind paralyzed by the dreadful shape which hadsprung out upon us from the shadows of the fog. A hound it was, anenormous coal-black hound, but not such a hound as mortal eyes haveever seen. Fire burst from its open mouth, its eyes glowed with asmouldering glare, its muzzle and hackles and dewlap were outlined inflickering flame. Never in the delirious dream of a disordered braincould anything more savage, more appalling, more hellish be conceivedthan that dark form and savage face which broke upon us out of thewall of fog.
With long bounds the huge black creature was leaping down the track,following hard upon the footsteps of our friend. So paralyzed were weby the apparition that we allowed him to pass before we had recoveredour nerve. Then Holmes and I both fired together, and the creaturegave a hideous howl, which showed that one at least had hit him. Hedid not pause, however, but bounded onward. Far away on the path wesaw Sir Henry looking back, his face white in the moonlight, hishands raised in horror, glaring helplessly at the frightful thingwhich was hunting him down.
But that cry of pain from the hound had blown all our fears to thewinds. If he was vulnerable he was mortal, and if we could wound himwe could kill him. Never have I seen a man run as Holmes ran thatnight. I am reckoned fleet of foot, but he outpaced me as much as Ioutpaced the little professional. In front of us as we flew up thetrack we heard scream after scream from Sir Henry and the deep roarof the hound. I was in time to see the beast spring upon its victim,hurl him to the ground, and worry at his throat. But the next instantHolmes had emptied five barrels of his revolver into the creature'sflank. With a last howl of agony and a vicious snap in the air, itrolled upon its back, four feet pawing furiously, and then fell limpupon its side. I stooped, panting, and pressed my pistol to thedreadful, shimmering head, but it was useless to press the trigger.The giant hound was dead.
Sir Henry lay insensible where he had fallen. We tore away hiscollar, and Holmes breathed a prayer of gratitude when we saw thatthere was no sign of a wound and that the rescue had been in time.Already our friend's eyelids shivered and he made a feeble effort tomove. Lestrade thrust his brandy-flask between the baronet's teeth,and two frightened eyes were looking up at us.
"My God!" he whispered. "What was it? What, in heaven's name, wasit?"
"It's dead, whatever it is," said Holmes. "We've laid the familyghost once and forever."
In mere size and strength it was a terrible creature which was lyingstretched before us. It was not a pure bloodhound and it was not apure mastiff; but it appeared to be a combination of the two--gaunt,savage, and as large as a small lioness. Even now, in the stillnessof death, the huge jaws seemed to be dripping with a bluish flame andthe small, deep-set, cruel eyes were ringed with fire. I placed myhand upon the glowing muzzle, and as I held them up my own fingerssmouldered and gleamed in the darkness.
"Phosphorus," I said.
"A cunning preparation of it," said Holmes, sniffing at the deadanimal. "There is no smell which might have interfered with his powerof scent. We owe you a deep apology, Sir Henry, for having exposedyou to this fright. I was prepared for a hound, but not for such acreature as this. And the fog gave us little time to receive him."
"You have saved my life."
"Having first endangered it. Are you strong enough to stand?"
"Give me another mouthful of that brandy and I shall be ready foranything. So! Now, if you will help me up. What do you propose todo?"
"To leave you here. You are not fit for further adventures to-night.If you will wait, one or other of us will go back with you to theHall."
He tried to stagger to his feet; but he was still ghastly pale andtrembling in every limb. We helped him to a rock, where he satshivering with his face buried in his hands.
"We must leave you now," said Holmes. "The rest of our work must bedone, and every moment is of importance. We have our case, and now weonly want our man.
"It's a thousand to one against our finding him at the house," hecontinued as we retraced our steps swiftly down the path. "Thoseshots must have told him that the game was up."
"We were some distance off, and this fog may have deadened them."
"He followed the hound to call him off--of that you may be certain.No, no, he's gone by this time! But we'll search the house and makesure."
The front door was open, so we rushed in and hurried from room toroom to the amazement of a doddering old manservant, who met us inthe passage. There was no light save in the dining-room, but Holmescaught up the lamp and left no corner of the house unexplored. Nosign could we see of the man whom we were chasing. On the upperfloor, however, one of the bedroom doors was locked.
"There's someone in here," cried Lestrade. "I can hear a movement.Open this door!"
A faint moaning and rustling came from within. Holmes struck the doorjust over the lock with the flat of his foot and it flew open. Pistolin hand, we all three rushed into the room.
But there was no sign within it of that desperate and defiant villainwhom we expected to see. Instead we were faced by an object sostrange and so unexpected that we stood for a moment staring at it inamazement.
The room had been fashioned into a small museum, and the walls werelined by a number of glass-topped cases full of that collection ofbutterflies and moths the formation of which had been the relaxationof this complex and dangerous man. In the centre of this room therewas an upright beam, which had been placed at some period as asupport for the old worm-eaten baulk of timber which spanned theroof. To this post a figure was tied, so swathed and muffled in thesheets which had been used to secure it that one could not for themoment tell whether it was that of a man or a woman. One towel passedround the throat and was secured at the back of the pillar. Anothercovered the lower part of the face, and over it two dark eyes--eyesfull of grief and shame and a dreadful questioning--stared back atus. In a minute we had torn off the gag, unswathed the bonds, andMrs. Stapleton sank upon the floor in front of us. As her beautifulhead fell upon her chest I saw the clear red weal of a whiplashacross her neck.
"The brute!" cried Holmes. "Here, Lestrade, your brandy-bottle! Puther in the chair! She has fainted from ill-usage and exhaustion."
She opened her eyes again.
"Is he safe?" she asked. "Has he escaped?"
"He cannot escape us, madam."
"No, no, I did not mean my husband. Sir Henry? Is he safe?"
"Yes."
"And the hound?"
"It is dead."
She gave a long sigh of satisfaction.
"Thank God! Thank God! Oh, this villain! See how he has treated me!"She shot her arms out from her sleeves, and we saw with horror thatthey were all mottled with bruises. "But this is nothing--nothing! Itis my mind and soul that he has tortured and defiled. I could endureit all, ill-usage, solitude, a life of deception, everything, as longas I could still cling to the hope that I had his love, but now Iknow that in this also I have been his dupe and his tool." She brokeinto passionate sobbing as she spoke.
"You bear him no good will, madam," said Holmes. "Tell us then wherewe shall find him. If you have ever aided him in evil, help us nowand so atone."
"There is but one place where he can have fled," she answered. "Thereis an old tin mine on an island in the heart of the mire. It wasthere that he kept his hound and there also he had made preparationsso that he might have a refuge. That is where he would fly."
The fog-bank lay like white wool against the window. Holmes held thelamp towards it.
"See," said he. "No one could find his way into the Grimpen Mireto-night."
She laughed and clapped her hands. Her eyes and teeth gleamed withfierce merriment.
"He may find his way in, but never out," she cried. "How can he seethe guiding wands to-night? We planted them together, he and I, tomark the pathway through the mire. Oh, if I could only have pluckedthem out to-day. Then indeed you would have had him at your mercy!"
It was evident to us that all pursuit was in vain until the fog hadlifted. Meanwhile we left Lestrade in possession of the house whileHolmes and I went back with the baronet to Baskerville Hall. Thestory of the Stapletons could no longer be withheld from him, but hetook the blow bravely when he learned the truth about the woman whomhe had loved. But the shock of the night's adventures had shatteredhis nerves, and before morning he lay delirious in a high fever,under the care of Dr. Mortimer. The two of them were destined totravel together round the world before Sir Henry had become once morethe hale, hearty man that he had been before he became master of thatill-omened estate.
And now I come rapidly to the conclusion of this singular narrative,in which I have tried to make the reader share those dark fears andvague surmises which clouded our lives so long and ended in so tragica manner. On the morning after the death of the hound the fog hadlifted and we were guided by Mrs. Stapleton to the point where theyhad found a pathway through the bog. It helped us to realize thehorror of this woman's life when we saw the eagerness and joy withwhich she laid us on her husband's track. We left her standing uponthe thin peninsula of firm, peaty soil which tapered out into thewidespread bog. From the end of it a small wand planted here andthere showed where the path zigzagged from tuft to tuft of rushesamong those green-scummed pits and foul quagmires which barred theway to the stranger. Rank reeds and lush, slimy water-plants sent anodour of decay and a heavy miasmatic vapour onto our faces, while afalse step plunged us more than once thigh-deep into the dark,quivering mire, which shook for yards in soft undulations around ourfeet. Its tenacious grip plucked at our heels as we walked, and whenwe sank into it it was as if some malignant hand was tugging us downinto those obscene depths, so grim and purposeful was the clutch inwhich it held us. Once only we saw a trace that someone had passedthat perilous way before us. From amid a tuft of cotton grass whichbore it up out of the slime some dark thing was projecting. Holmessank to his waist as he stepped from the path to seize it, and had wenot been there to drag him out he could never have set his foot uponfirm land again. He held an old black boot in the air. "Meyers,Toronto," was printed on the leather inside.
"It is worth a mud bath," said he. "It is our friend Sir Henry'smissing boot."
"Thrown there by Stapleton in his flight."
"Exactly. He retained it in his hand after using it to set the houndupon the track. He fled when he knew the game was up, still clutchingit. And he hurled it away at this point of his flight. We know atleast that he came so far in safety."
But more than that we were never destined to know, though there wasmuch which we might surmise. There was no chance of finding footstepsin the mire, for the rising mud oozed swiftly in upon them, but as weat last reached firmer ground beyond the morass we all looked eagerlyfor them. But no slightest sign of them ever met our eyes. If theearth told a true story, then Stapleton never reached that island ofrefuge towards which he struggled through the fog upon that lastnight. Somewhere in the heart of the great Grimpen Mire, down in thefoul slime of the huge morass which had sucked him in, this cold andcruel-hearted man is forever buried.
Many traces we found of him in the bog-girt island where he had hidhis savage ally. A huge driving-wheel and a shaft half-filled withrubbish showed the position of an abandoned mine. Beside it were thecrumbling remains of the cottages of the miners, driven away no doubtby the foul reek of the surrounding swamp. In one of these a stapleand chain with a quantity of gnawed bones showed where the animal hadbeen confined. A skeleton with a tangle of brown hair adhering to itlay among the debris.
"A dog!" said Holmes. "By Jove, a curly-haired spaniel. Poor Mortimerwill never see his pet again. Well, I do not know that this placecontains any secret which we have not already fathomed. He could hidehis hound, but he could not hush its voice, and hence came thosecries which even in daylight were not pleasant to hear. On anemergency he could keep the hound in the out-house at Merripit, butit was always a risk, and it was only on the supreme day, which heregarded as the end of all his efforts, that he dared do it. Thispaste in the tin is no doubt the luminous mixture with which thecreature was daubed. It was suggested, of course, by the story of thefamily hell-hound, and by the desire to frighten old Sir Charles todeath. No wonder the poor devil of a convict ran and screamed, evenas our friend did, and as we ourselves might have done, when he sawsuch a creature bounding through the darkness of the moor upon histrack. It was a cunning device, for, apart from the chance of drivingyour victim to his death, what peasant would venture to inquire tooclosely into such a creature should he get sight of it, as many havedone, upon the moor? I said it in London, Watson, and I say it againnow, that never yet have we helped to hunt down a more dangerous manthan he who is lying yonder"--he swept his long arm towards the hugemottled expanse of green-splotched bog which stretched away until itmerged into the russet slopes of the moor.




     CHAPTER XV     A Retrospection

It was the end of November and Holmes and I sat, upon a raw and foggynight, on either side of a blazing fire in our sitting-room in BakerStreet. Since the tragic upshot of our visit to Devonshire he hadbeen engaged in two affairs of the utmost importance, in the first ofwhich he had exposed the atrocious conduct of Colonel Upwood inconnection with the famous card scandal of the Nonpareil Club, whilein the second he had defended the unfortunate Mme. Montpensier fromthe charge of murder which hung over her in connection with the deathof her step-daughter, Mlle. Carere, the young lady who, as it will beremembered, was found six months later alive and married in New York.My friend was in excellent spirits over the success which hadattended a succession of difficult and important cases, so that I wasable to induce him to discuss the details of the Baskerville mystery.I had waited patiently for the opportunity, for I was aware that hewould never permit cases to overlap, and that his clear and logicalmind would not be drawn from its present work to dwell upon memoriesof the past. Sir Henry and Dr. Mortimer were, however, in London, ontheir way to that long voyage which had been recommended for therestoration of his shattered nerves. They had called upon us thatvery afternoon, so that it was natural that the subject should comeup for discussion.
"The whole course of events," said Holmes, "from the point of view ofthe man who called himself Stapleton was simple and direct, althoughto us, who had no means in the beginning of knowing the motives ofhis actions and could only learn part of the facts, it all appearedexceedingly complex. I have had the advantage of two conversationswith Mrs. Stapleton, and the case has now been so entirely cleared upthat I am not aware that there is anything which has remained asecret to us. You will find a few notes upon the matter under theheading B in my indexed list of cases."
"Perhaps you would kindly give me a sketch of the course of eventsfrom memory."
"Certainly, though I cannot guarantee that I carry all the facts inmy mind. Intense mental concentration has a curious way of blottingout what has passed. The barrister who has his case at his fingers'ends, and is able to argue with an expert upon his own subject findsthat a week or two of the courts will drive it all out of his headonce more. So each of my cases displaces the last, and Mlle. Carerehas blurred my recollection of Baskerville Hall. To-morrow some otherlittle problem may be submitted to my notice which will in turndispossess the fair French lady and the infamous Upwood. So far asthe case of the Hound goes, however, I will give you the course ofevents as nearly as I can, and you will suggest anything which I mayhave forgotten.
"My inquiries show beyond all question that the family portrait didnot lie, and that this fellow was indeed a Baskerville. He was a sonof that Rodger Baskerville, the younger brother of Sir Charles, whofled with a sinister reputation to South America, where he was saidto have died unmarried. He did, as a matter of fact, marry, and hadone child, this fellow, whose real name is the same as his father's.He married Beryl Garcia, one of the beauties of Costa Rica, and,having purloined a considerable sum of public money, he changed hisname to Vandeleur and fled to England, where he established a schoolin the east of Yorkshire. His reason for attempting this special lineof business was that he had struck up an acquaintance with aconsumptive tutor upon the voyage home, and that he had used thisman's ability to make the undertaking a success. Fraser, the tutor,died however, and the school which had begun well sank from disreputeinto infamy. The Vandeleurs found it convenient to change their nameto Stapleton, and he brought the remains of his fortune, his schemesfor the future, and his taste for entomology to the south of England.I learned at the British Museum that he was a recognized authorityupon the subject, and that the name of Vandeleur has been permanentlyattached to a certain moth which he had, in his Yorkshire days, beenthe first to describe.
"We now come to that portion of his life which has proved to be ofsuch intense interest to us. The fellow had evidently made inquiryand found that only two lives intervened between him and a valuableestate. When he went to Devonshire his plans were, I believe,exceedingly hazy, but that he meant mischief from the first isevident from the way in which he took his wife with him in thecharacter of his sister. The idea of using her as a decoy was clearlyalready in his mind, though he may not have been certain how thedetails of his plot were to be arranged. He meant in the end to havethe estate, and he was ready to use any tool or run any risk for thatend. His first act was to establish himself as near to his ancestralhome as he could, and his second was to cultivate a friendship withSir Charles Baskerville and with the neighbours.
"The baronet himself told him about the family hound, and so preparedthe way for his own death. Stapleton, as I will continue to call him,knew that the old man's heart was weak and that a shock would killhim. So much he had learned from Dr. Mortimer. He had heard also thatSir Charles was superstitious and had taken this grim legend veryseriously. His ingenious mind instantly suggested a way by which thebaronet could be done to death, and yet it would be hardly possibleto bring home the guilt to the real murderer.
"Having conceived the idea he proceeded to carry it out withconsiderable finesse. An ordinary schemer would have been content towork with a savage hound. The use of artificial means to make thecreature diabolical was a flash of genius upon his part. The dog hebought in London from Ross and Mangles, the dealers in Fulham Road.It was the strongest and most savage in their possession. He broughtit down by the North Devon line and walked a great distance over themoor so as to get it home without exciting any remarks. He hadalready on his insect hunts learned to penetrate the Grimpen Mire,and so had found a safe hiding-place for the creature. Here hekennelled it and waited his chance.
"But it was some time coming. The old gentleman could not be decoyedoutside of his grounds at night. Several times Stapleton lurked aboutwith his hound, but without avail. It was during these fruitlessquests that he, or rather his ally, was seen by peasants, and thatthe legend of the demon dog received a new confirmation. He had hopedthat his wife might lure Sir Charles to his ruin, but here she provedunexpectedly independent. She would not endeavour to entangle the oldgentleman in a sentimental attachment which might deliver him over tohis enemy. Threats and even, I am sorry to say, blows refused to moveher. She would have nothing to do with it, and for a time Stapletonwas at a deadlock.
"He found a way out of his difficulties through the chance that SirCharles, who had conceived a friendship for him, made him theminister of his charity in the case of this unfortunate woman, Mrs.Laura Lyons. By representing himself as a single man he acquiredcomplete influence over her, and he gave her to understand that inthe event of her obtaining a divorce from her husband he would marryher. His plans were suddenly brought to a head by his knowledge thatSir Charles was about to leave the Hall on the advice of Dr.Mortimer, with whose opinion he himself pretended to coincide. Hemust act at once, or his victim might get beyond his power. Hetherefore put pressure upon Mrs. Lyons to write this letter,imploring the old man to give her an interview on the evening beforehis departure for London. He then, by a specious argument, preventedher from going, and so had the chance for which he had waited.
"Driving back in the evening from Coombe Tracey he was in time to gethis hound, to treat it with his infernal paint, and to bring thebeast round to the gate at which he had reason to expect that hewould find the old gentleman waiting. The dog, incited by its master,sprang over the wicket-gate and pursued the unfortunate baronet, whofled screaming down the Yew Alley. In that gloomy tunnel it mustindeed have been a dreadful sight to see that huge black creature,with its flaming jaws and blazing eyes, bounding after its victim. Hefell dead at the end of the alley from heart disease and terror. Thehound had kept upon the grassy border while the baronet had run downthe path, so that no track but the man's was visible. On seeing himlying still the creature had probably approached to sniff at him, butfinding him dead had turned away again. It was then that it left theprint which was actually observed by Dr. Mortimer. The hound wascalled off and hurried away to its lair in the Grimpen Mire, and amystery was left which puzzled the authorities, alarmed thecountry-side, and finally brought the case within the scope of ourobservation.
"So much for the death of Sir Charles Baskerville. You perceive thedevilish cunning of it, for really it would be almost impossible tomake a case against the real murderer. His only accomplice was onewho could never give him away, and the grotesque, inconceivablenature of the device only served to make it more effective. Both ofthe women concerned in the case, Mrs. Stapleton and Mrs. Laura Lyons,were left with a strong suspicion against Stapleton. Mrs. Stapletonknew that he had designs upon the old man, and also of the existenceof the hound. Mrs. Lyons knew neither of these things, but had beenimpressed by the death occurring at the time of an uncancelledappointment which was only known to him. However, both of them wereunder his influence, and he had nothing to fear from them. The firsthalf of his task was successfully accomplished but the more difficultstill remained.
"It is possible that Stapleton did not know of the existence of anheir in Canada. In any case he would very soon learn it from hisfriend Dr. Mortimer, and he was told by the latter all details aboutthe arrival of Henry Baskerville. Stapleton's first idea was thatthis young stranger from Canada might possibly be done to death inLondon without coming down to Devonshire at all. He distrusted hiswife ever since she had refused to help him in laying a trap for theold man, and he dared not leave her long out of his sight for fear heshould lose his influence over her. It was for this reason that hetook her to London with him. They lodged, I find, at the MexboroughPrivate Hotel, in Craven Street, which was actually one of thosecalled upon by my agent in search of evidence. Here he kept his wifeimprisoned in her room while he, disguised in a beard, followed Dr.Mortimer to Baker Street and afterwards to the station and to theNorthumberland Hotel. His wife had some inkling of his plans; but shehad such a fear of her husband--a fear founded upon brutalill-treatment--that she dare not write to warn the man whom she knewto be in danger. If the letter should fall into Stapleton's hands herown life would not be safe. Eventually, as we know, she adopted theexpedient of cutting out the words which would form the message, andaddressing the letter in a disguised hand. It reached the baronet,and gave him the first warning of his danger.
"It was very essential for Stapleton to get some article of SirHenry's attire so that, in case he was driven to use the dog, hemight always have the means of setting him upon his track. Withcharacteristic promptness and audacity he set about this at once, andwe cannot doubt that the boots or chamber-maid of the hotel was wellbribed to help him in his design. By chance, however, the first bootwhich was procured for him was a new one and, therefore, useless forhis purpose. He then had it returned and obtained another--a mostinstructive incident, since it proved conclusively to my mind that wewere dealing with a real hound, as no other supposition could explainthis anxiety to obtain an old boot and this indifference to a newone. The more outr and grotesque an incident is the more carefullyit deserves to be examined, and the very point which appears tocomplicate a case is, when duly considered and scientificallyhandled, the one which is most likely to elucidate it.
"Then we had the visit from our friends next morning, shadowed alwaysby Stapleton in the cab. From his knowledge of our rooms and of myappearance, as well as from his general conduct, I am inclined tothink that Stapleton's career of crime has been by no means limitedto this single Baskerville affair. It is suggestive that during thelast three years there have been four considerable burglaries in theWest Country, for none of which was any criminal ever arrested. Thelast of these, at Folkestone Court, in May, was remarkable for thecold-blooded pistoling of the page, who surprised the masked andsolitary burglar. I cannot doubt that Stapleton recruited his waningresources in this fashion, and that for years he has been a desperateand dangerous man.
"We had an example of his readiness of resource that morning when hegot away from us so successfully, and also of his audacity in sendingback my own name to me through the cabman. From that moment heunderstood that I had taken over the case in London, and thattherefore there was no chance for him there. He returned to Dartmoorand awaited the arrival of the baronet."
"One moment!" said I. "You have, no doubt, described the sequence ofevents correctly, but there is one point which you have leftunexplained. What became of the hound when its master was in London?"
"I have given some attention to this matter and it is undoubtedly ofimportance. There can be no question that Stapleton had a confidant,though it is unlikely that he ever placed himself in his power bysharing all his plans with him. There was an old manservant atMerripit House, whose name was Anthony. His connection with theStapletons can be traced for several years, as far back as theschoolmastering days, so that he must have been aware that his masterand mistress were really husband and wife. This man has disappearedand has escaped from the country. It is suggestive that Anthony isnot a common name in England, while Antonio is so in all Spanish orSpanish-American countries. The man, like Mrs. Stapleton herself,spoke good English, but with a curious lisping accent. I have myselfseen this old man cross the Grimpen Mire by the path which Stapletonhad marked out. It is very probable, therefore, that in the absenceof his master it was he who cared for the hound, though he may neverhave known the purpose for which the beast was used.
"The Stapletons then went down to Devonshire, whither they were soonfollowed by Sir Henry and you. One word now as to how I stood myselfat that time. It may possibly recur to your memory that when Iexamined the paper upon which the printed words were fastened I madea close inspection for the water-mark. In doing so I held it within afew inches of my eyes, and was conscious of a faint smell of thescent known as white jessamine. There are seventy-five perfumes,which it is very necessary that a criminal expert should be able todistinguish from each other, and cases have more than once within myown experience depended upon their prompt recognition. The scentsuggested the presence of a lady, and already my thoughts began toturn towards the Stapletons. Thus I had made certain of the hound,and had guessed at the criminal before ever we went to the westcountry.
"It was my game to watch Stapleton. It was evident, however, that Icould not do this if I were with you, since he would be keenly on hisguard. I deceived everybody, therefore, yourself included, and I camedown secretly when I was supposed to be in London. My hardships werenot so great as you imagined, though such trifling details must neverinterfere with the investigation of a case. I stayed for the mostpart at Coombe Tracey, and only used the hut upon the moor when itwas necessary to be near the scene of action. Cartwright had comedown with me, and in his disguise as a country boy he was of greatassistance to me. I was dependent upon him for food and clean linen.When I was watching Stapleton, Cartwright was frequently watchingyou, so that I was able to keep my hand upon all the strings.
"I have already told you that your reports reached me rapidly, beingforwarded instantly from Baker Street to Coombe Tracey. They were ofgreat service to me, and especially that one incidentally truthfulpiece of biography of Stapleton's. I was able to establish theidentity of the man and the woman and knew at last exactly how Istood. The case had been considerably complicated through theincident of the escaped convict and the relations between him and theBarrymores. This also you cleared up in a very effective way, thoughI had already come to the same conclusions from my own observations.
"By the time that you discovered me upon the moor I had a completeknowledge of the whole business, but I had not a case which could goto a jury. Even Stapleton's attempt upon Sir Henry that night whichended in the death of the unfortunate convict did not help us much inproving murder against our man. There seemed to be no alternative butto catch him red-handed, and to do so we had to use Sir Henry, aloneand apparently unprotected, as a bait. We did so, and at the cost ofa severe shock to our client we succeeded in completing our case anddriving Stapleton to his destruction. That Sir Henry should have beenexposed to this is, I must confess, a reproach to my management ofthe case, but we had no means of foreseeing the terrible andparalyzing spectacle which the beast presented, nor could we predictthe fog which enabled him to burst upon us at such short notice. Wesucceeded in our object at a cost which both the specialist and Dr.Mortimer assure me will be a temporary one. A long journey may enableour friend to recover not only from his shattered nerves but alsofrom his wounded feelings. His love for the lady was deep andsincere, and to him the saddest part of all this black business wasthat he should have been deceived by her.
"It only remains to indicate the part which she had playedthroughout. There can be no doubt that Stapleton exercised aninfluence over her which may have been love or may have been fear, orvery possibly both, since they are by no means incompatible emotions.It was, at least, absolutely effective. At his command she consentedto pass as his sister, though he found the limits of his power overher when he endeavoured to make her the direct accessory to murder.She was ready to warn Sir Henry so far as she could withoutimplicating her husband, and again and again she tried to do so.Stapleton himself seems to have been capable of jealousy, and when hesaw the baronet paying court to the lady, even though it was part ofhis own plan, still he could not help interrupting with a passionateoutburst which revealed the fiery soul which his self-containedmanner so cleverly concealed. By encouraging the intimacy he made itcertain that Sir Henry would frequently come to Merripit House andthat he would sooner or later get the opportunity which he desired.On the day of the crisis, however, his wife turned suddenly againsthim. She had learned something of the death of the convict, and sheknew that the hound was being kept in the out-house on the eveningthat Sir Henry was coming to dinner. She taxed her husband with hisintended crime, and a furious scene followed, in which he showed herfor the first time that she had a rival in his love. Her fidelityturned in an instant to bitter hatred and he saw that she wouldbetray him. He tied her up, therefore, that she might have no chanceof warning Sir Henry, and he hoped, no doubt, that when the wholecountry-side put down the baronet's death to the curse of his family,as they certainly would do, he could win his wife back to accept anaccomplished fact and to keep silent upon what she knew. In this Ifancy that in any case he made a miscalculation, and that, if we hadnot been there, his doom would none the less have been sealed. Awoman of Spanish blood does not condone such an injury so lightly.And now, my dear Watson, without referring to my notes, I cannot giveyou a more detailed account of this curious case. I do not know thatanything essential has been left unexplained."
"He could not hope to frighten Sir Henry to death as he had done theold uncle with his bogie hound."
"The beast was savage and half-starved. If its appearance did notfrighten its victim to death, at least it would paralyze theresistance which might be offered."
"No doubt. There only remains one difficulty. If Stapleton came intothe succession, how could he explain the fact that he, the heir, hadbeen living unannounced under another name so close to the property?How could he claim it without causing suspicion and inquiry?"
"It is a formidable difficulty, and I fear that you ask too much whenyou expect me to solve it. The past and the present are within thefield of my inquiry, but what a man may do in the future is a hardquestion to answer. Mrs. Stapleton has heard her husband discuss theproblem on several occasions. There were three possible courses. Hemight claim the property from South America, establish his identitybefore the British authorities there and so obtain the fortunewithout ever coming to England at all; or he might adopt an elaboratedisguise during the short time that he need be in London; or, again,he might furnish an accomplice with the proofs and papers, puttinghim in as heir, and retaining a claim upon some proportion of hisincome. We cannot doubt from what we know of him that he would havefound some way out of the difficulty. And now, my dear Watson, wehave had some weeks of severe work, and for one evening, I think, wemay turn our thoughts into more pleasant channels. I have a box for'Les Huguenots.' Have you heard the De Reszkes? Might I trouble youthen to be ready in half an hour, and we can stop at Marcini's for alittle dinner on the way?"





                          THE VALLEY OF FEAR




                           Table of contents
    Part I   The Warning   Sherlock Holmes Discourses   The Tragedy of Birlstone   Darkness   The People Of the Drama   A Dawning Light   The Solution
    Part II   The Man   The Bodymaster   Lodge 341, Vermissa   The Valley of Fear   The Darkest Hour   Danger   The Trapping of Birdy Edwards   Epilogue


















                                 PART I
                       The Tragedy of Birlstone




     CHAPTER I     The Warning

"I am inclined to think--" said I.
"I should do so," Sherlock Holmes remarked impatiently.
I believe that I am one of the most long-suffering of mortals; butI'll admit that I was annoyed at the sardonic interruption.
"Really, Holmes," said I severely, "you are a little trying attimes."
He was too much absorbed with his own thoughts to give any immediateanswer to my remonstrance. He leaned upon his hand, with his untastedbreakfast before him, and he stared at the slip of paper which he hadjust drawn from its envelope. Then he took the envelope itself, heldit up to the light, and very carefully studied both the exterior andthe flap.
"It is Porlock's writing," said he thoughtfully. "I can hardly doubtthat it is Porlock's writing, though I have seen it only twicebefore. The Greek e with the peculiar top flourish is distinctive.But if it is Porlock, then it must be something of the very firstimportance."
He was speaking to himself rather than to me; but my vexationdisappeared in the interest which the words awakened.
"Who then is Porlock?" I asked.
"Porlock, Watson, is a nom-de-plume, a mere identification mark; butbehind it lies a shifty and evasive personality. In a former letterhe frankly informed me that the name was not his own, and defied meever to trace him among the teeming millions of this great city.Porlock is important, not for himself, but for the great man withwhom he is in touch. Picture to yourself the pilot fish with theshark, the jackal with the lion--anything that is insignificant incompanionship with what is formidable: not only formidable, Watson,but sinister--in the highest degree sinister. That is where he comeswithin my purview. You have heard me speak of Professor Moriarty?"
"The famous scientific criminal, as famous among crooks as--"
"My blushes, Watson!" Holmes murmured in a deprecating voice.
"I was about to say, as he is unknown to the public."
"A touch! A distinct touch!" cried Holmes. "You are developing acertain unexpected vein of pawky humour, Watson, against which I mustlearn to guard myself. But in calling Moriarty a criminal you areuttering libel in the eyes of the law--and there lie the glory andthe wonder of it! The greatest schemer of all time, the organizer ofevery deviltry, the controlling brain of the underworld, a brainwhich might have made or marred the destiny of nations--that's theman! But so aloof is he from general suspicion, so immune fromcriticism, so admirable in his management and self-effacement, thatfor those very words that you have uttered he could hale you to acourt and emerge with your year's pension as a solatium for hiswounded character. Is he not the celebrated author of The Dynamics ofan Asteroid, a book which ascends to such rarefied heights of puremathematics that it is said that there was no man in the scientificpress capable of criticizing it? Is this a man to traduce?Foul-mouthed doctor and slandered professor--such would be yourrespective roles! That's genius, Watson. But if I am spared by lessermen, our day will surely come."
"May I be there to see!" I exclaimed devoutly. "But you were speakingof this man Porlock."
"Ah, yes--the so-called Porlock is a link in the chain some littleway from its great attachment. Porlock is not quite a soundlink--between ourselves. He is the only flaw in that chain so far asI have been able to test it."
"But no chain is stronger than its weakest link."
"Exactly, my dear Watson! Hence the extreme importance of Porlock.Led on by some rudimentary aspirations towards right, and encouragedby the judicious stimulation of an occasional ten-pound note sent tohim by devious methods, he has once or twice given me advanceinformation which has been of value--that highest value whichanticipates and prevents rather than avenges crime. I cannot doubtthat, if we had the cipher, we should find that this communication isof the nature that I indicate."
Again Holmes flattened out the paper upon his unused plate. I roseand, leaning over him, stared down at the curious inscription, whichran as follows:
                    534 C2 13 127 36 31 4 17 21 41                    DOUGLAS 109 293 5 37 BIRLSTONE                         26 BIRLSTONE 9 47 171
"What do you make of it, Holmes?"
"It is obviously an attempt to convey secret information."
"But what is the use of a cipher message without the cipher?"
"In this instance, none at all."
"Why do you say 'in this instance'?"
"Because there are many ciphers which I would read as easily as I dothe apocrypha of the agony column: such crude devices amuse theintelligence without fatiguing it. But this is different. It isclearly a reference to the words in a page of some book. Until I amtold which page and which book I am powerless."
"But why 'Douglas' and 'Birlstone'?"
"Clearly because those are words which were not contained in the pagein question."
"Then why has he not indicated the book?"
"Your native shrewdness, my dear Watson, that innate cunning which isthe delight of your friends, would surely prevent you from inclosingcipher and message in the same envelope. Should it miscarry, you areundone. As it is, both have to go wrong before any harm comes fromit. Our second post is now overdue, and I shall be surprised if itdoes not bring us either a further letter of explanation, or, as ismore probable, the very volume to which these figures refer."
Holmes's calculation was fulfilled within a very few minutes by theappearance of Billy, the page, with the very letter which we wereexpecting.
"The same writing," remarked Holmes, as he opened the envelope, "andactually signed," he added in an exultant voice as he unfolded theepistle. "Come, we are getting on, Watson." His brow clouded,however, as he glanced over the contents.
"Dear me, this is very disappointing! I fear, Watson, that all ourexpectations come to nothing. I trust that the man Porlock will cometo no harm.
"Dear Mr. Holmes [he says]:"I will go no further in this matter. It is too dangerous--hesuspects me. I can see that he suspects me. He came to me quiteunexpectedly after I had actually addressed this envelope with theintention of sending you the key to the cipher. I was able to coverit up. If he had seen it, it would have gone hard with me. But I readsuspicion in his eyes. Please burn the cipher message, which can nowbe of no use to you."Fred Porlock."
Holmes sat for some little time twisting this letter between hisfingers, and frowning, as he stared into the fire.
"After all," he said at last, "there may be nothing in it. It may beonly his guilty conscience. Knowing himself to be a traitor, he mayhave read the accusation in the other's eyes."
"The other being, I presume, Professor Moriarty."
"No less! When any of that party talk about 'He' you know whom theymean. There is one predominant 'He' for all of them."
"But what can he do?"
"Hum! That's a large question. When you have one of the first brainsof Europe up against you, and all the powers of darkness at his back,there are infinite possibilities. Anyhow, Friend Porlock is evidentlyscared out of his senses--kindly compare the writing in the note tothat upon its envelope; which was done, he tells us, before thisill-omened visit. The one is clear and firm. The other hardlylegible."
"Why did he write at all? Why did he not simply drop it?"
"Because he feared I would make some inquiry after him in that case,and possibly bring trouble on him."
"No doubt," said I. "Of course." I had picked up the original ciphermessage and was bending my brows over it. "It's pretty maddening tothink that an important secret may lie here on this slip of paper,and that it is beyond human power to penetrate it."
Sherlock Holmes had pushed away his untasted breakfast and lit theunsavoury pipe which was the companion of his deepest meditations. "Iwonder!" said he, leaning back and staring at the ceiling. "Perhapsthere are points which have escaped your Machiavellian intellect. Letus consider the problem in the light of pure reason. This man'sreference is to a book. That is our point of departure."
"A somewhat vague one."
"Let us see then if we can narrow it down. As I focus my mind uponit, it seems rather less impenetrable. What indications have we as tothis book?"
"None."
"Well, well, it is surely not quite so bad as that. The ciphermessage begins with a large 534, does it not? We may take it as aworking hypothesis that 534 is the particular page to which thecipher refers. So our book has already become a large book which issurely something gained. What other indications have we as to thenature of this large book? The next sign is C2. What do you make ofthat, Watson?"
"Chapter the second, no doubt."
"Hardly that, Watson. You will, I am sure, agree with me that if thepage be given, the number of the chapter is immaterial. Also that ifpage 534 finds us only in the second chapter, the length of the firstone must have been really intolerable."
"Column!" I cried.
"Brilliant, Watson. You are scintillating this morning. If it is notcolumn, then I am very much deceived. So now, you see, we begin tovisualize a large book printed in double columns which are each of aconsiderable length, since one of the words is numbered in thedocument as the two hundred and ninety-third. Have we reached thelimits of what reason can supply?"
"I fear that we have."
"Surely you do yourself an injustice. One more coruscation, my dearWatson--yet another brain-wave! Had the volume been an unusual one,he would have sent it to me. Instead of that, he had intended, beforehis plans were nipped, to send me the clue in this envelope. He saysso in his note. This would seem to indicate that the book is onewhich he thought I would have no difficulty in finding for myself. Hehad it--and he imagined that I would have it, too. In short, Watson,it is a very common book."
"What you say certainly sounds plausible."
"So we have contracted our field of search to a large book, printedin double columns and in common use."
"The Bible!" I cried triumphantly.
"Good, Watson, good! But not, if I may say so, quite good enough!Even if I accepted the compliment for myself I could hardly name anyvolume which would be less likely to lie at the elbow of one ofMoriarty's associates. Besides, the editions of Holy Writ are sonumerous that he could hardly suppose that two copies would have thesame pagination. This is clearly a book which is standardized. Heknows for certain that his page 534 will exactly agree with my page534."
"But very few books would correspond with that."
"Exactly. Therein lies our salvation. Our search is narrowed down tostandardized books which anyone may be supposed to possess."
"Bradshaw!"
"There are difficulties, Watson. The vocabulary of Bradshaw isnervous and terse, but limited. The selection of words would hardlylend itself to the sending of general messages. We will eliminateBradshaw. The dictionary is, I fear, inadmissible for the samereason. What then is left?"
"An almanac!"
"Excellent, Watson! I am very much mistaken if you have not touchedthe spot. An almanac! Let us consider the claims of Whitaker'sAlmanac. It is in common use. It has the requisite number of pages.It is in double column. Though reserved in its earlier vocabulary, itbecomes, if I remember right, quite garrulous towards the end." Hepicked the volume from his desk. "Here is page 534, column two, asubstantial block of print dealing, I perceive, with the trade andresources of British India. Jot down the words, Watson! Numberthirteen is 'Mahratta.' Not, I fear, a very auspicious beginning.Number one hundred and twenty-seven is 'Government'; which at leastmakes sense, though somewhat irrelevant to ourselves and ProfessorMoriarty. Now let us try again. What does the Mahratta government do?Alas! the next word is 'pig's-bristles.' We are undone, my goodWatson! It is finished!"
He had spoken in jesting vein, but the twitching of his bushyeyebrows bespoke his disappointment and irritation. I sat helplessand unhappy, staring into the fire. A long silence was broken by asudden exclamation from Holmes, who dashed at a cupboard, from whichhe emerged with a second yellow-covered volume in his hand.
"We pay the price, Watson, for being too up-to-date!" he cried. "Weare before our time, and suffer the usual penalties. Being theseventh of January, we have very properly laid in the new almanac. Itis more than likely that Porlock took his message from the old one.No doubt he would have told us so had his letter of explanation beenwritten. Now let us see what page 534 has in store for us. Numberthirteen is 'There,' which is much more promising. Number one hundredand twenty-seven is 'is'--'There is'"--Holmes's eyes were gleamingwith excitement, and his thin, nervous fingers twitched as he countedthe words--"'danger.' Ha! Ha! Capital! Put that down, Watson. 'Thereis danger-- may-- come-- very-- soon-- one.' Then we have the name'Douglas' --'rich-- country-- now-- at-- Birlstone-- House--Birlstone-- confidence-- is-- pressing.' There, Watson! What do youthink of pure reason and its fruit? If the greengrocer had such athing as a laurel wreath, I should send Billy round for it."
I was staring at the strange message which I had scrawled, as hedeciphered it, upon a sheet of foolscap on my knee.
"What a queer, scrambling way of expressing his meaning!" said I.
"On the contrary, he has done quite remarkably well," said Holmes."When you search a single column for words with which to express yourmeaning, you can hardly expect to get everything you want. You arebound to leave something to the intelligence of your correspondent.The purport is perfectly clear. Some deviltry is intended against oneDouglas, whoever he may be, residing as stated, a rich countrygentleman. He is sure--'confidence' was as near as he could get to'confident'--that it is pressing. There is our result--and a veryworkmanlike little bit of analysis it was!"
Holmes had the impersonal joy of the true artist in his better work,even as he mourned darkly when it fell below the high level to whichhe aspired. He was still chuckling over his success when Billy swungopen the door and Inspector MacDonald of Scotland Yard was usheredinto the room.
Those were the early days at the end of the '80's, when AlecMacDonald was far from having attained the national fame which he hasnow achieved. He was a young but trusted member of the detectiveforce, who had distinguished himself in several cases which had beenentrusted to him. His tall, bony figure gave promise of exceptionalphysical strength, while his great cranium and deep-set, lustrouseyes spoke no less clearly of the keen intelligence which twinkledout from behind his bushy eyebrows. He was a silent, precise man witha dour nature and a hard Aberdonian accent.
Twice already in his career had Holmes helped him to attain success,his own sole reward being the intellectual joy of the problem. Forthis reason the affection and respect of the Scotchman for hisamateur colleague were profound, and he showed them by the franknesswith which he consulted Holmes in every difficulty. Mediocrity knowsnothing higher than itself; but talent instantly recognizes genius,and MacDonald had talent enough for his profession to enable him toperceive that there was no humiliation in seeking the assistance ofone who already stood alone in Europe, both in his gifts and in hisexperience. Holmes was not prone to friendship, but he was tolerantof the big Scotchman, and smiled at the sight of him.
"You are an early bird, Mr. Mac," said he. "I wish you luck with yourworm. I fear this means that there is some mischief afoot."
"If you said 'hope' instead of 'fear,' it would be nearer the truth,I'm thinking, Mr. Holmes," the inspector answered, with a knowinggrin. "Well, maybe a wee nip would keep out the raw morning chill.No, I won't smoke, I thank you. I'll have to be pushing on my way;for the early hours of a case are the precious ones, as no man knowsbetter than your own self. But--but--"
The inspector had stopped suddenly, and was staring with a look ofabsolute amazement at a paper upon the table. It was the sheet uponwhich I had scrawled the enigmatic message.
"Douglas!" he stammered. "Birlstone! What's this, Mr. Holmes? Man,it's witchcraft! Where in the name of all that is wonderful did youget those names?"
"It is a cipher that Dr. Watson and I have had occasion to solve. Butwhy--what's amiss with the names?"
The inspector looked from one to the other of us in dazedastonishment. "Just this," said he, "that Mr. Douglas of BirlstoneManor House was horribly murdered last night!"




     CHAPTER II     Sherlock Holmes Discourses

It was one of those dramatic moments for which my friend existed. Itwould be an overstatement to say that he was shocked or even excitedby the amazing announcement. Without having a tinge of cruelty in hissingular composition, he was undoubtedly callous from longover-stimulation. Yet, if his emotions were dulled, his intellectualperceptions were exceedingly active. There was no trace then of thehorror which I had myself felt at this curt declaration; but his faceshowed rather the quiet and interested composure of the chemist whosees the crystals falling into position from his oversaturatedsolution.
"Remarkable!" said he. "Remarkable!"
"You don't seem surprised."
"Interested, Mr. Mac, but hardly surprised. Why should I besurprised? I receive an anonymous communication from a quarter whichI know to be important, warning me that danger threatens a certainperson. Within an hour I learn that this danger has actuallymaterialized and that the person is dead. I am interested; but, asyou observe, I am not surprised."
In a few short sentences he explained to the inspector the factsabout the letter and the cipher. MacDonald sat with his chin on hishands and his great sandy eyebrows bunched into a yellow tangle.
"I was going down to Birlstone this morning," said he. "I had come toask you if you cared to come with me--you and your friend here. Butfrom what you say we might perhaps be doing better work in London."
"I rather think not," said Holmes.
"Hang it all, Mr. Holmes!" cried the inspector. "The papers will befull of the Birlstone mystery in a day or two; but where's themystery if there is a man in London who prophesied the crime beforeever it occurred? We have only to lay our hands on that man, and therest will follow."
"No doubt, Mr. Mac. But how do you propose to lay your hands on theso-called Porlock?"
MacDonald turned over the letter which Holmes had handed him. "Postedin Camberwell--that doesn't help us much. Name, you say, is assumed.Not much to go on, certainly. Didn't you say that you have sent himmoney?"
"Twice."
"And how?"
"In notes to Camberwell post-office."
"Did you ever trouble to see who called for them?"
"No."
The inspector looked surprised and a little shocked. "Why not?"
"Because I always keep faith. I had promised when he first wrote thatI would not try to trace him."
"You think there is someone behind him?"
"I know there is."
"This professor that I've heard you mention?"
"Exactly!"
Inspector MacDonald smiled, and his eyelid quivered as he glancedtowards me. "I won't conceal from you, Mr. Holmes, that we think inthe C. I. D. that you have a wee bit of a bee in your bonnet overthis professor. I made some inquiries myself about the matter. Heseems to be a very respectable, learned, and talented sort of man."
"I'm glad you've got so far as to recognize the talent."
"Man, you can't but recognize it! After I heard your view I made itmy business to see him. I had a chat with him on eclipses. How thetalk got that way I canna think; but he had out a reflector lanternand a globe, and made it all clear in a minute. He lent me a book;but I don't mind saying that it was a bit above my head, though I hada good Aberdeen upbringing. He'd have made a grand meenister with histhin face and gray hair and solemn-like way of talking. When he puthis hand on my shoulder as we were parting, it was like a father'sblessing before you go out into the cold, cruel world."
Holmes chuckled and rubbed his hands. "Great!" he said. "Great! Tellme, Friend MacDonald, this pleasing and touching interview was, Isuppose, in the professor's study?"
"That's so."
"A fine room, is it not?"
"Very fine--very handsome indeed, Mr. Holmes."
"You sat in front of his writing desk?"
"Just so."
"Sun in your eyes and his face in the shadow?"
"Well, it was evening; but I mind that the lamp was turned on myface."
"It would be. Did you happen to observe a picture over theprofessor's head?"
"I don't miss much, Mr. Holmes. Maybe I learned that from you. Yes, Isaw the picture--a young woman with her head on her hands, peeping atyou sideways."
"That painting was by Jean Baptiste Greuze."
The inspector endeavoured to look interested.
"Jean Baptiste Greuze," Holmes continued, joining his finger tips andleaning well back in his chair, "was a French artist who flourishedbetween the years 1750 and 1800. I allude, of course to his workingcareer. Modern criticism has more than indorsed the high opinionformed of him by his contemporaries."
The inspector's eyes grew abstracted. "Hadn't we better--" he said.
"We are doing so," Holmes interrupted. "All that I am saying has avery direct and vital bearing upon what you have called the BirlstoneMystery. In fact, it may in a sense be called the very centre of it."
MacDonald smiled feebly, and looked appealingly to me. "Your thoughtsmove a bit too quick for me, Mr. Holmes. You leave out a link or two,and I can't get over the gap. What in the whole wide world can be theconnection between this dead painting man and the affair atBirlstone?"
"All knowledge comes useful to the detective," remarked Holmes. "Eventhe trivial fact that in the year 1865 a picture by Greuze entitledLa Jeune Fille a l'Agneau fetched one million two hundred thousandfrancs--more than forty thousand pounds--at the Portalis sale maystart a train of reflection in your mind."
It was clear that it did. The inspector looked honestly interested.
"I may remind you," Holmes continued, "that the professor's salarycan be ascertained in several trustworthy books of reference. It isseven hundred a year."
"Then how could he buy--"
"Quite so! How could he?"
"Ay, that's remarkable," said the inspector thoughtfully. "Talk away,Mr. Holmes. I'm just loving it. It's fine!"
Holmes smiled. He was always warmed by genuine admiration--thecharacteristic of the real artist. "What about Birlstone?" he asked.
"We've time yet," said the inspector, glancing at his watch. "I've acab at the door, and it won't take us twenty minutes to Victoria. Butabout this picture: I thought you told me once, Mr. Holmes, that youhad never met Professor Moriarty."
"No, I never have."
"Then how do you know about his rooms?"
"Ah, that's another matter. I have been three times in his rooms,twice waiting for him under different pretexts and leaving before hecame. Once--well, I can hardly tell about the once to an officialdetective. It was on the last occasion that I took the liberty ofrunning over his papers--with the most unexpected results."
"You found something compromising?"
"Absolutely nothing. That was what amazed me. However, you have nowseen the point of the picture. It shows him to be a very wealthy man.How did he acquire wealth? He is unmarried. His younger brother is astation master in the west of England. His chair is worth sevenhundred a year. And he owns a Greuze."
"Well?"
"Surely the inference is plain."
"You mean that he has a great income and that he must earn it in anillegal fashion?"
"Exactly. Of course I have other reasons for thinking so--dozens ofexiguous threads which lead vaguely up towards the centre of the webwhere the poisonous, motionless creature is lurking. I only mentionthe Greuze because it brings the matter within the range of your ownobservation."
"Well, Mr. Holmes, I admit that what you say is interesting: it'smore than interesting--it's just wonderful. But let us have it alittle clearer if you can. Is it forgery, coining, burglary--wheredoes the money come from?"
"Have you ever read of Jonathan Wild?"
"Well, the name has a familiar sound. Someone in a novel, was he not?I don't take much stock of detectives in novels--chaps that do thingsand never let you see how they do them. That's just inspiration: notbusiness."
"Jonathan Wild wasn't a detective, and he wasn't in a novel. He was amaster criminal, and he lived last century--1750 or thereabouts."
"Then he's no use to me. I'm a practical man."
"Mr. Mac, the most practical thing that you ever did in your lifewould be to shut yourself up for three months and read twelve hours aday at the annals of crime. Everything comes in circles--evenProfessor Moriarty. Jonathan Wild was the hidden force of the Londoncriminals, to whom he sold his brains and his organization on afifteen per cent commission. The old wheel turns, and the same spokecomes up. It's all been done before, and will be again. I'll tell youone or two things about Moriarty which may interest you."
"You'll interest me, right enough."
"I happen to know who is the first link in his chain--a chain withthis Napoleon-gone-wrong at one end, and a hundred broken fightingmen, pickpockets, blackmailers, and card sharpers at the other, withevery sort of crime in between. His chief of staff is ColonelSebastian Moran, as aloof and guarded and inaccessible to the law ashimself. What do you think he pays him?"
"I'd like to hear."
"Six thousand a year. That's paying for brains, you see--the Americanbusiness principle. I learned that detail quite by chance. It's morethan the Prime Minister gets. That gives you an idea of Moriarty'sgains and of the scale on which he works. Another point: I made it mybusiness to hunt down some of Moriarty's checks lately--just commoninnocent checks that he pays his household bills with. They weredrawn on six different banks. Does that make any impression on yourmind?"
"Queer, certainly! But what do you gather from it?"
"That he wanted no gossip about his wealth. No single man should knowwhat he had. I have no doubt that he has twenty banking accounts; thebulk of his fortune abroad in the Deutsche Bank or the CreditLyonnais as likely as not. Sometime when you have a year or two tospare I commend to you the study of Professor Moriarty."
Inspector MacDonald had grown steadily more impressed as theconversation proceeded. He had lost himself in his interest. Now hispractical Scotch intelligence brought him back with a snap to thematter in hand.
"He can keep, anyhow," said he. "You've got us side-tracked with yourinteresting anecdotes, Mr. Holmes. What really counts is your remarkthat there is some connection between the professor and the crime.That you get from the warning received through the man Porlock. Canwe for our present practical needs get any further than that?"
"We may form some conception as to the motives of the crime. It is,as I gather from your original remarks, an inexplicable, or at leastan unexplained, murder. Now, presuming that the source of the crimeis as we suspect it to be, there might be two different motives. Inthe first place, I may tell you that Moriarty rules with a rod ofiron over his people. His discipline is tremendous. There is only onepunishment in his code. It is death. Now we might suppose that thismurdered man--this Douglas whose approaching fate was known by one ofthe arch-criminal's subordinates--had in some way betrayed the chief.His punishment followed, and would be known to all--if only to putthe fear of death into them."
"Well, that is one suggestion, Mr. Holmes."
"The other is that it has been engineered by Moriarty in the ordinarycourse of business. Was there any robbery?"
"I have not heard."
"If so, it would, of course, be against the first hypothesis and infavour of the second. Moriarty may have been engaged to engineer iton a promise of part spoils, or he may have been paid so much down tomanage it. Either is possible. But whichever it may be, or if it issome third combination, it is down at Birlstone that we must seek thesolution. I know our man too well to suppose that he has leftanything up here which may lead us to him."
"Then to Birlstone we must go!" cried MacDonald, jumping from hischair. "My word! it's later than I thought. I can give you,gentlemen, five minutes for preparation, and that is all."
"And ample for us both," said Holmes, as he sprang up and hastened tochange from his dressing gown to his coat. "While we are on our way,Mr. Mac, I will ask you to be good enough to tell me all about it."
"All about it" proved to be disappointingly little, and yet there wasenough to assure us that the case before us might well be worthy ofthe expert's closest attention. He brightened and rubbed his thinhands together as he listened to the meagre but remarkable details. Along series of sterile weeks lay behind us, and here at last therewas a fitting object for those remarkable powers which, like allspecial gifts, become irksome to their owner when they are not inuse. That razor brain blunted and rusted with inaction.
Sherlock Holmes's eyes glistened, his pale cheeks took a warmer hue,and his whole eager face shone with an inward light when the call forwork reached him. Leaning forward in the cab, he listened intently toMacDonald's short sketch of the problem which awaited us in Sussex.The inspector was himself dependent, as he explained to us, upon ascribbled account forwarded to him by the milk train in the earlyhours of the morning. White Mason, the local officer, was a personalfriend, and hence MacDonald had been notified much more promptly thanis usual at Scotland Yard when provincials need their assistance. Itis a very cold scent upon which the Metropolitan expert is generallyasked to run.
"Dear Inspector MacDonald [said the letter which he read to us]:"Official requisition for your services is in separate envelope. Thisis for your private eye. Wire me what train in the morning you canget for Birlstone, and I will meet it--or have it met if I am toooccupied. This case is a snorter. Don't waste a moment in gettingstarted. If you can bring Mr. Holmes, please do so; for he will findsomething after his own heart. We would think the whole thing hadbeen fixed up for theatrical effect if there wasn't a dead man in themiddle of it. My word! it is a snorter."
 "Your friend seems to be no fool," remarked Holmes.
"No, sir, White Mason is a very live man, if I am any judge."
"Well, have you anything more?"
"Only that he will give us every detail when we meet."
"Then how did you get at Mr. Douglas and the fact that he had beenhorribly murdered?"
"That was in the enclosed official report. It didn't say 'horrible':that's not a recognized official term. It gave the name John Douglas.It mentioned that his injuries had been in the head, from thedischarge of a shotgun. It also mentioned the hour of the alarm,which was close on to midnight last night. It added that the case wasundoubtedly one of murder, but that no arrest had been made, and thatthe case was one which presented some very perplexing andextraordinary features. That's absolutely all we have at present, Mr.Holmes."
"Then, with your permission, we will leave it at that, Mr. Mac. Thetemptation to form premature theories upon insufficient data is thebane of our profession. I can see only two things for certain atpresent--a great brain in London, and a dead man in Sussex. It's thechain between that we are going to trace."




     CHAPTER III     The Tragedy of Birlstone

Now for a moment I will ask leave to remove my own insignificantpersonality and to describe events which occurred before we arrivedupon the scene by the light of knowledge which came to us afterwards.Only in this way can I make the reader appreciate the peopleconcerned and the strange setting in which their fate was cast.
The village of Birlstone is a small and very ancient cluster ofhalf-timbered cottages on the northern border of the county ofSussex. For centuries it had remained unchanged; but within the lastfew years its picturesque appearance and situation have attracted anumber of well-to-do residents, whose villas peep out from the woodsaround. These woods are locally supposed to be the extreme fringe ofthe great Weald forest, which thins away until it reaches thenorthern chalk downs. A number of small shops have come into being tomeet the wants of the increased population; so there seems someprospect that Birlstone may soon grow from an ancient village into amodern town. It is the centre for a considerable area of country,since Tunbridge Wells, the nearest place of importance, is ten ortwelve miles to the eastward, over the borders of Kent.
About half a mile from the town, standing in an old park famous forits huge beech trees, is the ancient Manor House of Birlstone. Partof this venerable building dates back to the time of the firstcrusade, when Hugo de Capus built a fortalice in the centre of theestate, which had been granted to him by the Red King. This wasdestroyed by fire in 1543, and some of its smoke-blackened cornerstones were used when, in Jacobean times, a brick country house roseupon the ruins of the feudal castle.
The Manor House, with its many gables and its small diamond-panedwindows, was still much as the builder had left it in the earlyseventeenth century. Of the double moats which had guarded its morewarlike predecessor, the outer had been allowed to dry up, and servedthe humble function of a kitchen garden. The inner one was stillthere, and lay forty feet in breadth, though now only a few feet indepth, round the whole house. A small stream fed it and continuedbeyond it, so that the sheet of water, though turbid, was neverditch-like or unhealthy. The ground floor windows were within a footof the surface of the water.
The only approach to the house was over a drawbridge, the chains andwindlass of which had long been rusted and broken. The latest tenantsof the Manor House had, however, with characteristic energy, set thisright, and the drawbridge was not only capable of being raised, butactually was raised every evening and lowered every morning. By thusrenewing the custom of the old feudal days the Manor House wasconverted into an island during the night--a fact which had a verydirect bearing upon the mystery which was soon to engage theattention of all England.
The house had been untenanted for some years and was threatening tomoulder into a picturesque decay when the Douglases took possessionof it. This family consisted of only two individuals--John Douglasand his wife. Douglas was a remarkable man, both in character and inperson. In age he may have been about fifty, with a strong-jawed,rugged face, a grizzling moustache, peculiarly keen gray eyes, and awiry, vigorous figure which had lost nothing of the strength andactivity of youth. He was cheery and genial to all, but somewhatoffhand in his manners, giving the impression that he had seen lifein social strata on some far lower horizon than the county society ofSussex.
Yet, though looked at with some curiosity and reserve by his morecultivated neighbours, he soon acquired a great popularity among thevillagers, subscribing handsomely to all local objects, and attendingtheir smoking concerts and other functions, where, having aremarkably rich tenor voice, he was always ready to oblige with anexcellent song. He appeared to have plenty of money, which was saidto have been gained in the California gold fields, and it was clearfrom his own talk and that of his wife that he had spent a part ofhis life in America.
The good impression which had been produced by his generosity and byhis democratic manners was increased by a reputation gained for utterindifference to danger. Though a wretched rider, he turned out atevery meet, and took the most amazing falls in his determination tohold his own with the best. When the vicarage caught fire hedistinguished himself also by the fearlessness with which hereentered the building to save property, after the local fire brigadehad given it up as impossible. Thus it came about that John Douglasof the Manor House had within five years won himself quite areputation in Birlstone.
His wife, too, was popular with those who had made her acquaintance;though, after the English fashion, the callers upon a stranger whosettled in the county without introductions were few and far between.This mattered the less to her, as she was retiring by disposition,and very much absorbed, to all appearance, in her husband and herdomestic duties. It was known that she was an English lady who hadmet Mr. Douglas in London, he being at that time a widower. She was abeautiful woman, tall, dark, and slender, some twenty years youngerthan her husband, a disparity which seemed in no wise to mar thecontentment of their family life.
It was remarked sometimes, however, by those who knew them best, thatthe confidence between the two did not appear to be complete, sincethe wife was either very reticent about her husband's past life, orelse, as seemed more likely, was imperfectly informed about it. Ithad also been noted and commented upon by a few observant people thatthere were signs sometimes of some nerve-strain upon the part of Mrs.Douglas, and that she would display acute uneasiness if her absenthusband should ever be particularly late in his return. On a quietcountryside, where all gossip is welcome, this weakness of the ladyof the Manor House did not pass without remark, and it bulked largerupon people's memory when the events arose which gave it a veryspecial significance.
There was yet another individual whose residence under that roof was,it is true, only an intermittent one, but whose presence at the timeof the strange happenings which will now be narrated brought his nameprominently before the public. This was Cecil James Barker, of HalesLodge, Hampstead.
Cecil Barker's tall, loose-jointed figure was a familiar one in themain street of Birlstone village; for he was a frequent and welcomevisitor at the Manor House. He was the more noticed as being the onlyfriend of the past unknown life of Mr. Douglas who was ever seen inhis new English surroundings. Barker was himself an undoubtedEnglishman; but by his remarks it was clear that he had first knownDouglas in America and had there lived on intimate terms with him. Heappeared to be a man of considerable wealth, and was reputed to be abachelor.
In age he was rather younger than Douglas--forty-five at the most--atall, straight, broad-chested fellow with a clean-shaved,prize-fighter face, thick, strong, black eyebrows, and a pair ofmasterful black eyes which might, even without the aid of his verycapable hands, clear a way for him through a hostile crowd. Heneither rode nor shot, but spent his days in wandering round the oldvillage with his pipe in his mouth, or in driving with his host, orin his absence with his hostess, over the beautiful countryside. "Aneasy-going, free-handed gentleman," said Ames, the butler. "But, myword! I had rather not be the man that crossed him!" He was cordialand intimate with Douglas, and he was no less friendly with hiswife--a friendship which more than once seemed to cause someirritation to the husband, so that even the servants were able toperceive his annoyance. Such was the third person who was one of thefamily when the catastrophe occurred.
As to the other denizens of the old building, it will suffice out ofa large household to mention the prim, respectable, and capable Ames,and Mrs. Allen, a buxom and cheerful person, who relieved the lady ofsome of her household cares. The other six servants in the house bearno relation to the events of the night of January 6th.
It was at eleven forty-five that the first alarm reached the smalllocal police station, in charge of Sergeant Wilson of the SussexConstabulary. Cecil Barker, much excited, had rushed up to the doorand pealed furiously upon the bell. A terrible tragedy had occurredat the Manor House, and John Douglas had been murdered. That was thebreathless burden of his message. He had hurried back to the house,followed within a few minutes by the police sergeant, who arrived atthe scene of the crime a little after twelve o'clock, after takingprompt steps to warn the county authorities that something seriouswas afoot.
On reaching the Manor House, the sergeant had found the drawbridgedown, the windows lighted up, and the whole household in a state ofwild confusion and alarm. The white-faced servants were huddlingtogether in the hall, with the frightened butler wringing his handsin the doorway. Only Cecil Barker seemed to be master of himself andhis emotions; he had opened the door which was nearest to theentrance and he had beckoned to the sergeant to follow him. At thatmoment there arrived Dr. Wood, a brisk and capable generalpractitioner from the village. The three men entered the fatal roomtogether, while the horror-stricken butler followed at their heels,closing the door behind him to shut out the terrible scene from themaid servants.
The dead man lay on his back, sprawling with outstretched limbs inthe centre of the room. He was clad only in a pink dressing gown,which covered his night clothes. There were carpet slippers on hisbare feet. The doctor knelt beside him and held down the hand lampwhich had stood on the table. One glance at the victim was enough toshow the healer that his presence could be dispensed with. The manhad been horribly injured. Lying across his chest was a curiousweapon, a shotgun with the barrel sawed off a foot in front of thetriggers. It was clear that this had been fired at close range andthat he had received the whole charge in the face, blowing his headalmost to pieces. The triggers had been wired together, so as to makethe simultaneous discharge more destructive.
The country policeman was unnerved and troubled by the tremendousresponsibility which had come so suddenly upon him. "We will touchnothing until my superiors arrive," he said in a hushed voice,staring in horror at the dreadful head.
"Nothing has been touched up to now," said Cecil Barker. "I'll answerfor that. You see it all exactly as I found it."
"When was that?" The sergeant had drawn out his notebook.
"It was just half-past eleven. I had not begun to undress, and I wassitting by the fire in my bedroom when I heard the report. It was notvery loud--it seemed to be muffled. I rushed down--I don't suppose itwas thirty seconds before I was in the room."
"Was the door open?"
"Yes, it was open. Poor Douglas was lying as you see him. His bedroomcandle was burning on the table. It was I who lit the lamp someminutes afterward."
"Did you see no one?"
"No. I heard Mrs. Douglas coming down the stair behind me, and Irushed out to prevent her from seeing this dreadful sight. Mrs.Allen, the housekeeper, came and took her away. Ames had arrived, andwe ran back into the room once more."
"But surely I have heard that the drawbridge is kept up all night."
"Yes, it was up until I lowered it."
"Then how could any murderer have got away? It is out of thequestion! Mr. Douglas must have shot himself."
"That was our first idea. But see!" Barker drew aside the curtain,and showed that the long, diamond-paned window was open to its fullextent. "And look at this!" He held the lamp down and illuminated asmudge of blood like the mark of a boot-sole upon the wooden sill."Someone has stood there in getting out."
"You mean that someone waded across the moat?"
"Exactly!"
"Then if you were in the room within half a minute of the crime, hemust have been in the water at that very moment."
"I have not a doubt of it. I wish to heaven that I had rushed to thewindow! But the curtain screened it, as you can see, and so it neveroccurred to me. Then I heard the step of Mrs. Douglas, and I couldnot let her enter the room. It would have been too horrible."
"Horrible enough!" said the doctor, looking at the shattered head andthe terrible marks which surrounded it. "I've never seen suchinjuries since the Birlstone railway smash."
"But, I say," remarked the police sergeant, whose slow, bucoliccommon sense was still pondering the open window. "It's all very wellyour saying that a man escaped by wading this moat, but what I askyou is, how did he ever get into the house at all if the bridge wasup?"
"Ah, that's the question," said Barker.
"At what o'clock was it raised?"
"It was nearly six o'clock," said Ames, the butler.
"I've heard," said the sergeant, "that it was usually raised atsunset. That would be nearer half-past four than six at this time ofyear."
"Mrs. Douglas had visitors to tea," said Ames. "I couldn't raise ituntil they went. Then I wound it up myself."
"Then it comes to this," said the sergeant: "If anyone came fromoutside--if they did--they must have got in across the bridge beforesix and been in hiding ever since, until Mr. Douglas came into theroom after eleven."
"That is so! Mr. Douglas went round the house every night the lastthing before he turned in to see that the lights were right. Thatbrought him in here. The man was waiting and shot him. Then he gotaway through the window and left his gun behind him. That's how Iread it; for nothing else will fit the facts."
The sergeant picked up a card which lay beside the dead man on thefloor. The initials V. V. and under them the number 341 were rudelyscrawled in ink upon it.
"What's this?" he asked, holding it up.
Barker looked at it with curiosity. "I never noticed it before," hesaid. "The murderer must have left it behind him."
"V. V.--341. I can make no sense of that."
The sergeant kept turning it over in his big fingers. "What's V. V.?Somebody's initials, maybe. What have you got there, Dr. Wood?"
It was a good-sized hammer which had been lying on the rug in frontof the fireplace--a substantial, workmanlike hammer. Cecil Barkerpointed to a box of brass-headed nails upon the mantelpiece.
"Mr. Douglas was altering the pictures yesterday," he said. "I sawhim myself, standing upon that chair and fixing the big picture aboveit. That accounts for the hammer."
"We'd best put it back on the rug where we found it," said thesergeant, scratching his puzzled head in his perplexity. "It willwant the best brains in the force to get to the bottom of this thing.It will be a London job before it is finished." He raised the handlamp and walked slowly round the room. "Hullo!" he cried, excitedly,drawing the window curtain to one side. "What o'clock were thosecurtains drawn?"
"When the lamps were lit," said the butler. "It would be shortlyafter four."
"Someone had been hiding here, sure enough." He held down the light,and the marks of muddy boots were very visible in the corner. "I'mbound to say this bears out your theory, Mr. Barker. It looks as ifthe man got into the house after four when the curtains were drawnand before six when the bridge was raised. He slipped into this room,because it was the first that he saw. There was no other place wherehe could hide, so he popped in behind this curtain. That all seemsclear enough. It is likely that his main idea was to burgle thehouse; but Mr. Douglas chanced to come upon him, so he murdered himand escaped."
"That's how I read it," said Barker. "But, I say, aren't we wastingprecious time? Couldn't we start out and scour the country before thefellow gets away?"
The sergeant considered for a moment.
"There are no trains before six in the morning; so he can't get awayby rail. If he goes by road with his legs all dripping, it's oddsthat someone will notice him. Anyhow, I can't leave here myself untilI am relieved. But I think none of you should go until we see moreclearly how we all stand."
The doctor had taken the lamp and was narrowly scrutinizing the body."What's this mark?" he asked. "Could this have any connection withthe crime?"
The dead man's right arm was thrust out from his dressing gown, andexposed as high as the elbow. About halfway up the forearm was acurious brown design, a triangle inside a circle, standing out invivid relief upon the lard-coloured skin.
"It's not tattooed," said the doctor, peering through his glasses. "Inever saw anything like it. The man has been branded at some time asthey brand cattle. What is the meaning of this?"
"I don't profess to know the meaning of it," said Cecil Barker; "butI have seen the mark on Douglas many times this last ten years."
"And so have I," said the butler. "Many a time when the master hasrolled up his sleeves I have noticed that very mark. I've oftenwondered what it could be."
"Then it has nothing to do with the crime, anyhow," said thesergeant. "But it's a rum thing all the same. Everything about thiscase is rum. Well, what is it now?"
The butler had given an exclamation of astonishment and was pointingat the dead man's outstretched hand.
"They've taken his wedding ring!" he gasped.
"What!"
"Yes, indeed. Master always wore his plain gold wedding ring on thelittle finger of his left hand. That ring with the rough nugget on itwas above it, and the twisted snake ring on the third finger. There'sthe nugget and there's the snake, but the wedding ring is gone."
"He's right," said Barker.
"Do you tell me," said the sergeant, "that the wedding ring was belowthe other?"
"Always!"
"Then the murderer, or whoever it was, first took off this ring youcall the nugget ring, then the wedding ring, and afterwards put thenugget ring back again."
"That is so!"
The worthy country policeman shook his head. "Seems to me the soonerwe get London on to this case the better," said he. "White Mason is asmart man. No local job has ever been too much for White Mason. Itwon't be long now before he is here to help us. But I expect we'llhave to look to London before we are through. Anyhow, I'm not ashamedto say that it is a deal too thick for the likes of me."




     CHAPTER IV     Darkness

At three in the morning the chief Sussex detective, obeying theurgent call from Sergeant Wilson of Birlstone, arrived fromheadquarters in a light dog-cart behind a breathless trotter. By thefive-forty train in the morning he had sent his message to ScotlandYard, and he was at the Birlstone station at twelve o'clock towelcome us. White Mason was a quiet, comfortable-looking person in aloose tweed suit, with a clean-shaved, ruddy face, a stoutish body,and powerful bandy legs adorned with gaiters, looking like a smallfarmer, a retired gamekeeper, or anything upon earth except a veryfavourable specimen of the provincial criminal officer.
"A real downright snorter, Mr. MacDonald!" he kept repeating. "We'llhave the pressmen down like flies when they understand it. I'm hopingwe will get our work done before they get poking their noses into itand messing up all the trails. There has been nothing like this thatI can remember. There are some bits that will come home to you, Mr.Holmes, or I am mistaken. And you also, Dr. Watson; for the medicoswill have a word to say before we finish. Your room is at theWestville Arms. There's no other place; but I hear that it is cleanand good. The man will carry your bags. This way, gentlemen, if youplease."
He was a very bustling and genial person, this Sussex detective. Inten minutes we had all found our quarters. In ten more we were seatedin the parlour of the inn and being treated to a rapid sketch ofthose events which have been outlined in the previous chapter.MacDonald made an occasional note, while Holmes sat absorbed, withthe expression of surprised and reverent admiration with which thebotanist surveys the rare and precious bloom.
"Remarkable!" he said, when the story was unfolded, "most remarkable!I can hardly recall any case where the features have been morepeculiar."
"I thought you would say so, Mr. Holmes," said White Mason in greatdelight. "We're well up with the times in Sussex. I've told you nowhow matters were, up to the time when I took over from SergeantWilson between three and four this morning. My word! I made the oldmare go! But I need not have been in such a hurry, as it turned out;for there was nothing immediate that I could do. Sergeant Wilson hadall the facts. I checked them and considered them and maybe added afew of my own."
"What were they?" asked Holmes eagerly.
"Well, I first had the hammer examined. There was Dr. Wood there tohelp me. We found no signs of violence upon it. I was hoping that ifMr. Douglas defended himself with the hammer, he might have left hismark upon the murderer before he dropped it on the mat. But there wasno stain."
"That, of course, proves nothing at all," remarked InspectorMacDonald. "There has been many a hammer murder and no trace on thehammer."
"Quite so. It doesn't prove it wasn't used. But there might have beenstains, and that would have helped us. As a matter of fact there werenone. Then I examined the gun. They were buckshot cartridges, and, asSergeant Wilson pointed out, the triggers were wired together sothat, if you pulled on the hinder one, both barrels were discharged.Whoever fixed that up had made up his mind that he was going to takeno chances of missing his man. The sawed gun was not more than twofoot long--one could carry it easily under one's coat. There was nocomplete maker's name; but the printed letters P-E-N were on thefluting between the barrels, and the rest of the name had been cutoff by the saw."
"A big P with a flourish above it, E and N smaller?" asked Holmes.
"Exactly."
"Pennsylvania Small Arms Company--well-known American firm," saidHolmes.
White Mason gazed at my friend as the little village practitionerlooks at the Harley Street specialist who by a word can solve thedifficulties that perplex him.
"That is very helpful, Mr. Holmes. No doubt you are right. Wonderful!Wonderful! Do you carry the names of all the gun makers in the worldin your memory?"
Holmes dismissed the subject with a wave.
"No doubt it is an American shotgun," White Mason continued. "I seemto have read that a sawed-off shotgun is a weapon used in some partsof America. Apart from the name upon the barrel, the idea hadoccurred to me. There is some evidence then, that this man whoentered the house and killed its master was an American."
MacDonald shook his head. "Man, you are surely travelling overfast,"said he. "I have heard no evidence yet that any stranger was ever inthe house at all."
"The open window, the blood on the sill, the queer card, the marks ofboots in the corner, the gun!"
"Nothing there that could not have been arranged. Mr. Douglas was anAmerican, or had lived long in America. So had Mr. Barker. You don'tneed to import an American from outside in order to account forAmerican doings."
"Ames, the butler--"
"What about him? Is he reliable?"
"Ten years with Sir Charles Chandos--as solid as a rock. He has beenwith Douglas ever since he took the Manor House five years ago. Hehas never seen a gun of this sort in the house."
"The gun was made to conceal. That's why the barrels were sawed. Itwould fit into any box. How could he swear there was no such gun inthe house?"
"Well, anyhow, he had never seen one."
MacDonald shook his obstinate Scotch head. "I'm not convinced yetthat there was ever anyone in the house," said he. "I'm asking you toconseedar" (his accent became more Aberdonian as he lost himself inhis argument) "I'm asking you to conseedar what it involves if yousuppose that this gun was ever brought into the house, and that allthese strange things were done by a person from outside. Oh, man,it's just inconceivable! It's clean against common sense! I put it toyou, Mr. Holmes, judging it by what we have heard."
"Well, state your case, Mr. Mac," said Holmes in his most judicialstyle.
"The man is not a burglar, supposing that he ever existed. The ringbusiness and the card point to premeditated murder for some privatereason. Very good. Here is a man who slips into a house with thedeliberate intention of committing murder. He knows, if he knowsanything, that he will have a deeficulty in making his escape, as thehouse is surrounded with water. What weapon would he choose? Youwould say the most silent in the world. Then he could hope when thedeed was done to slip quickly from the window, to wade the moat, andto get away at his leisure. That's understandable. But is itunderstandable that he should go out of his way to bring with him themost noisy weapon he could select, knowing well that it will fetchevery human being in the house to the spot as quick as they can run,and that it is all odds that he will be seen before he can get acrossthe moat? Is that credible, Mr. Holmes?"
"Well, you put the case strongly," my friend replied thoughtfully."It certainly needs a good deal of justification. May I ask, Mr.White Mason, whether you examined the farther side of the moat atonce to see if there were any signs of the man having climbed outfrom the water?"
"There were no signs, Mr. Holmes. But it is a stone ledge, and onecould hardly expect them."
"No tracks or marks?"
"None."
"Ha! Would there be any objection, Mr. White Mason, to our going downto the house at once? There may possibly be some small point whichmight be suggestive."
"I was going to propose it, Mr. Holmes; but I thought it well to putyou in touch with all the facts before we go. I suppose if anythingshould strike you--" White Mason looked doubtfully at the amateur.
"I have worked with Mr. Holmes before," said Inspector MacDonald. "Heplays the game."
"My own idea of the game, at any rate," said Holmes, with a smile. "Igo into a case to help the ends of justice and the work of thepolice. If I have ever separated myself from the official force, itis because they have first separated themselves from me. I have nowish ever to score at their expense. At the same time, Mr. WhiteMason, I claim the right to work in my own way and give my results atmy own time--complete rather than in stages."
"I am sure we are honoured by your presence and to show you all weknow," said White Mason cordially. "Come along, Dr. Watson, and whenthe time comes we'll all hope for a place in your book."
We walked down the quaint village street with a row of pollarded elmson each side of it. Just beyond were two ancient stone pillars,weather-stained and lichen-blotched bearing upon their summits ashapeless something which had once been the rampant lion of Capus ofBirlstone. A short walk along the winding drive with such sward andoaks around it as one only sees in rural England, then a sudden turn,and the long, low Jacobean house of dingy, liver-coloured brick laybefore us, with an old-fashioned garden of cut yews on each side ofit. As we approached it, there was the wooden drawbridge and thebeautiful broad moat as still and luminous as quicksilver in thecold, winter sunshine.
Three centuries had flowed past the old Manor House, centuries ofbirths and of homecomings, of country dances and of the meetings offox hunters. Strange that now in its old age this dark businessshould have cast its shadow upon the venerable walls! And yet thosestrange, peaked roofs and quaint, overhung gables were a fittingcovering to grim and terrible intrigue. As I looked at the deep-setwindows and the long sweep of the dull-coloured, water-lapped front,I felt that no more fitting scene could be set for such a tragedy.
"That's the window," said White Mason, "that one on the immediateright of the drawbridge. It's open just as it was found last night."
"It looks rather narrow for a man to pass."
"Well, it wasn't a fat man, anyhow. We don't need your deductions,Mr. Holmes, to tell us that. But you or I could squeeze through allright."
Holmes walked to the edge of the moat and looked across. Then heexamined the stone ledge and the grass border beyond it.
"I've had a good look, Mr. Holmes," said White Mason. "There isnothing there, no sign that anyone has landed--but why should heleave any sign?"
"Exactly. Why should he? Is the water always turbid?"
"Generally about this colour. The stream brings down the clay."
"How deep is it?"
"About two feet at each side and three in the middle."
"So we can put aside all idea of the man having been drowned incrossing."
"No, a child could not be drowned in it."
We walked across the drawbridge, and were admitted by a quaint,gnarled, dried-up person, who was the butler, Ames. The poor oldfellow was white and quivering from the shock. The village sergeant,a tall, formal, melancholy man, still held his vigil in the room ofFate. The doctor had departed.
"Anything fresh, Sergeant Wilson?" asked White Mason.
"No, sir."
"Then you can go home. You've had enough. We can send for you if wewant you. The butler had better wait outside. Tell him to warn Mr.Cecil Barker, Mrs. Douglas, and the housekeeper that we may want aword with them presently. Now, gentlemen, perhaps you will allow meto give you the views I have formed first, and then you will be ableto arrive at your own."
He impressed me, this country specialist. He had a solid grip of factand a cool, clear, common-sense brain, which should take him some wayin his profession. Holmes listened to him intently, with no sign ofthat impatience which the official exponent too often produced.
"Is it suicide, or is it murder--that's our first question,gentlemen, is it not? If it were suicide, then we have to believethat this man began by taking off his wedding ring and concealing it;that he then came down here in his dressing gown, trampled mud into acorner behind the curtain in order to give the idea someone hadwaited for him, opened the window, put blood on the--"
"We can surely dismiss that," said MacDonald.
"So I think. Suicide is out of the question. Then a murder has beendone. What we have to determine is, whether it was done by someoneoutside or inside the house."
"Well, let's hear the argument."
"There are considerable difficulties both ways, and yet one or theother it must be. We will suppose first that some person or personsinside the house did the crime. They got this man down here at a timewhen everything was still and yet no one was asleep. They then didthe deed with the queerest and noisiest weapon in the world so as totell everyone what had happened--a weapon that was never seen in thehouse before. That does not seem a very likely start, does it?"
"No, it does not."
"Well, then, everyone is agreed that after the alarm was given only aminute at the most had passed before the whole household--not Mr.Cecil Barker alone, though he claims to have been the first, but Amesand all of them were on the spot. Do you tell me that in that timethe guilty person managed to make footmarks in the corner, open thewindow, mark the sill with blood, take the wedding ring off the deadman's finger, and all the rest of it? It's impossible!"
"You put it very clearly," said Holmes. "I am inclined to agree withyou."
"Well, then, we are driven back to the theory that it was done bysomeone from outside. We are still faced with some big difficulties;but anyhow they have ceased to be impossibilities. The man got intothe house between four-thirty and six; that is to say, between duskand the time when the bridge was raised. There had been somevisitors, and the door was open; so there was nothing to prevent him.He may have been a common burglar, or he may have had some privategrudge against Mr. Douglas. Since Mr. Douglas has spent most of hislife in America, and this shotgun seems to be an American weapon, itwould seem that the private grudge is the more likely theory. Heslipped into this room because it was the first he came to, and hehid behind the curtain. There he remained until past eleven at night.At that time Mr. Douglas entered the room. It was a short interview,if there were any interview at all; for Mrs. Douglas declares thather husband had not left her more than a few minutes when she heardthe shot."
"The candle shows that," said Holmes.
"Exactly. The candle, which was a new one, is not burned more thanhalf an inch. He must have placed it on the table before he wasattacked; otherwise, of course, it would have fallen when he fell.This shows that he was not attacked the instant that he entered theroom. When Mr. Barker arrived the candle was lit and the lamp wasout."
"That's all clear enough."
"Well, now, we can reconstruct things on those lines. Mr. Douglasenters the room. He puts down the candle. A man appears from behindthe curtain. He is armed with this gun. He demands the weddingring--Heaven only knows why, but so it must have been. Mr. Douglasgave it up. Then either in cold blood or in the course of astruggle--Douglas may have gripped the hammer that was found upon themat--he shot Douglas in this horrible way. He dropped his gun andalso it would seem this queer card--V. V. 341, whatever that maymean--and he made his escape through the window and across the moatat the very moment when Cecil Barker was discovering the crime. How'sthat, Mr. Holmes?"
"Very interesting, but just a little unconvincing."
"Man, it would be absolute nonsense if it wasn't that anything elseis even worse!" cried MacDonald. "Somebody killed the man, andwhoever it was I could clearly prove to you that he should have doneit some other way. What does he mean by allowing his retreat to becut off like that? What does he mean by using a shotgun when silencewas his one chance of escape? Come, Mr. Holmes, it's up to you togive us a lead, since you say Mr. White Mason's theory isunconvincing."
Holmes had sat intently observant during this long discussion,missing no word that was said, with his keen eyes darting to rightand to left, and his forehead wrinkled with speculation.
"I should like a few more facts before I get so far as a theory, Mr.Mac," said he, kneeling down beside the body. "Dear me! theseinjuries are really appalling. Can we have the butler in for amoment? ... Ames, I understand that you have often seen this veryunusual mark--a branded triangle inside a circle--upon Mr. Douglas'sforearm?"
"Frequently, sir."
"You never heard any speculation as to what it meant?"
"No, sir."
"It must have caused great pain when it was inflicted. It isundoubtedly a burn. Now, I observe, Ames, that there is a small pieceof plaster at the angle of Mr. Douglas's jaw. Did you observe that inlife?"
"Yes, sir, he cut himself in shaving yesterday morning."
"Did you ever know him to cut himself in shaving before?"
"Not for a very long time, sir."
"Suggestive!" said Holmes. "It may, of course, be a mere coincidence,or it may point to some nervousness which would indicate that he hadreason to apprehend danger. Had you noticed anything unusual in hisconduct, yesterday, Ames?"
"It struck me that he was a little restless and excited, sir."
"Ha! The attack may not have been entirely unexpected. We do seem tomake a little progress, do we not? Perhaps you would rather do thequestioning, Mr. Mac?"
"No, Mr. Holmes, it's in better hands than mine."
"Well, then, we will pass to this card--V. V. 341. It is roughcardboard. Have you any of the sort in the house?"
"I don't think so."
Holmes walked across to the desk and dabbed a little ink from eachbottle on to the blotting paper. "It was not printed in this room,"he said; "this is black ink and the other purplish. It was done by athick pen, and these are fine. No, it was done elsewhere, I shouldsay. Can you make anything of the inscription, Ames?"
"No, sir, nothing."
"What do you think, Mr. Mac?"
"It gives me the impression of a secret society of some sort; thesame with his badge upon the forearm."
"That's my idea, too," said White Mason.
"Well, we can adopt it as a working hypothesis and then see how farour difficulties disappear. An agent from such a society makes hisway into the house, waits for Mr. Douglas, blows his head nearly offwith this weapon, and escapes by wading the moat, after leaving acard beside the dead man, which will when mentioned in the papers,tell other members of the society that vengeance has been done. Thatall hangs together. But why this gun, of all weapons?"
"Exactly."
"And why the missing ring?"
"Quite so."
"And why no arrest? It's past two now. I take it for granted thatsince dawn every constable within forty miles has been looking outfor a wet stranger?"
"That is so, Mr. Holmes."
"Well, unless he has a burrow close by or a change of clothes ready,they can hardly miss him. And yet they have missed him up to now!"Holmes had gone to the window and was examining with his lens theblood mark on the sill. "It is clearly the tread of a shoe. It isremarkably broad; a splay-foot, one would say. Curious, because, sofar as one can trace any footmark in this mud-stained corner, onewould say it was a more shapely sole. However, they are certainlyvery indistinct. What's this under the side table?"
"Mr. Douglas's dumb-bells," said Ames.
"Dumb-bell--there's only one. Where's the other?"
"I don't know, Mr. Holmes. There may have been only one. I have notnoticed them for months."
"One dumb-bell--" Holmes said seriously; but his remarks wereinterrupted by a sharp knock at the door.
A tall, sunburned, capable-looking, clean-shaved man looked in at us.I had no difficulty in guessing that it was the Cecil Barker of whomI had heard. His masterful eyes travelled quickly with a questioningglance from face to face.
"Sorry to interrupt your consultation," said he, "but you should hearthe latest news."
"An arrest?"
"No such luck. But they've found his bicycle. The fellow left hisbicycle behind him. Come and have a look. It is within a hundredyards of the hall door."
We found three or four grooms and idlers standing in the driveinspecting a bicycle which had been drawn out from a clump ofevergreens in which it had been concealed. It was a well usedRudge-Whitworth, splashed as from a considerable journey. There was asaddlebag with spanner and oilcan, but no clue as to the owner.
"It would be a grand help to the police," said the inspector, "ifthese things were numbered and registered. But we must be thankfulfor what we've got. If we can't find where he went to, at least weare likely to get where he came from. But what in the name of allthat is wonderful made the fellow leave it behind? And how in theworld has he got away without it? We don't seem to get a gleam oflight in the case, Mr. Holmes."
"Don't we?" my friend answered thoughtfully. "I wonder!"




     CHAPTER V     The People Of the Drama

"Have you seen all you want of the study?" asked White Mason as wereentered the house.
"For the time," said the inspector, and Holmes nodded.
"Then perhaps you would now like to hear the evidence of some of thepeople in the house. We could use the dining-room, Ames. Please comeyourself first and tell us what you know."
The butler's account was a simple and a clear one, and he gave aconvincing impression of sincerity. He had been engaged five yearsbefore, when Douglas first came to Birlstone. He understood that Mr.Douglas was a rich gentleman who had made his money in America. Hehad been a kind and considerate employer--not quite what Ames wasused to, perhaps; but one can't have everything. He never saw anysigns of apprehension in Mr. Douglas: on the contrary, he was themost fearless man he had ever known. He ordered the drawbridge to bepulled up every night because it was the ancient custom of the oldhouse, and he liked to keep the old ways up.
Mr. Douglas seldom went to London or left the village; but on the daybefore the crime he had been shopping at Tunbridge Wells. He (Ames)had observed some restlessness and excitement on the part of Mr.Douglas that day; for he had seemed impatient and irritable, whichwas unusual with him. He had not gone to bed that night; but was inthe pantry at the back of the house, putting away the silver, when heheard the bell ring violently. He heard no shot; but it was hardlypossible he would, as the pantry and kitchens were at the very backof the house and there were several closed doors and a long passagebetween. The housekeeper had come out of her room, attracted by theviolent ringing of the bell. They had gone to the front of the housetogether.
As they reached the bottom of the stair he had seen Mrs. Douglascoming down it. No, she was not hurrying; it did not seem to him thatshe was particularly agitated. Just as she reached the bottom of thestair Mr. Barker had rushed out of the study. He had stopped Mrs.Douglas and begged her to go back.
"For God's sake, go back to your room!" he cried. "Poor Jack is dead!You can do nothing. For God's sake, go back!"
After some persuasion upon the stairs Mrs. Douglas had gone back. Shedid not scream. She made no outcry whatever. Mrs. Allen, thehousekeeper, had taken her upstairs and stayed with her in thebedroom. Ames and Mr. Barker had then returned to the study, wherethey had found everything exactly as the police had seen it. Thecandle was not lit at that time; but the lamp was burning. They hadlooked out of the window; but the night was very dark and nothingcould be seen or heard. They had then rushed out into the hall, whereAmes had turned the windlass which lowered the drawbridge. Mr. Barkerhad then hurried off to get the police.
Such, in its essentials, was the evidence of the butler.
The account of Mrs. Allen, the housekeeper, was, so far as it went, acorroboration of that of her fellow servant. The housekeeper's roomwas rather nearer to the front of the house than the pantry in whichAmes had been working. She was preparing to go to bed when the loudringing of the bell had attracted her attention. She was a littlehard of hearing. Perhaps that was why she had not heard the shot; butin any case the study was a long way off. She remembered hearing somesound which she imagined to be the slamming of a door. That was agood deal earlier--half an hour at least before the ringing of thebell. When Mr. Ames ran to the front she went with him. She saw Mr.Barker, very pale and excited, come out of the study. He interceptedMrs. Douglas, who was coming down the stairs. He entreated her to goback, and she answered him, but what she said could not be heard.
"Take her up! Stay with her!" he had said to Mrs. Allen.
She had therefore taken her to the bedroom, and endeavoured to sootheher. She was greatly excited, trembling all over, but made no otherattempt to go downstairs. She just sat in her dressing gown by herbedroom fire, with her head sunk in her hands. Mrs. Allen stayed withher most of the night. As to the other servants, they had all gone tobed, and the alarm did not reach them until just before the policearrived. They slept at the extreme back of the house, and could notpossibly have heard anything.
So far the housekeeper could add nothing on cross-examination savelamentations and expressions of amazement.
Cecil Barker succeeded Mrs. Allen as a witness. As to the occurrencesof the night before, he had very little to add to what he had alreadytold the police. Personally, he was convinced that the murderer hadescaped by the window. The bloodstain was conclusive, in his opinion,on that point. Besides, as the bridge was up, there was no otherpossible way of escaping. He could not explain what had become of theassassin or why he had not taken his bicycle, if it were indeed his.He could not possibly have been drowned in the moat, which was at noplace more than three feet deep.
In his own mind he had a very definite theory about the murder.Douglas was a reticent man, and there were some chapters in his lifeof which he never spoke. He had emigrated to America when he was avery young man. He had prospered well, and Barker had first met himin California, where they had become partners in a successful miningclaim at a place called Benito Canyon. They had done very well; butDouglas had suddenly sold out and started for England. He was awidower at that time. Barker had afterwards realized his money andcome to live in London. Thus they had renewed their friendship.
Douglas had given him the impression that some danger was hangingover his head, and he had always looked upon his sudden departurefrom California, and also his renting a house in so quiet a place inEngland, as being connected with this peril. He imagined that somesecret society, some implacable organization, was on Douglas's track,which would never rest until it killed him. Some remarks of his hadgiven him this idea; though he had never told him what the societywas, nor how he had come to offend it. He could only suppose that thelegend upon the placard had some reference to this secret society.
"How long were you with Douglas in California?" asked InspectorMacDonald.
"Five years altogether."
"He was a bachelor, you say?"
"A widower."
"Have you ever heard where his first wife came from?"
"No, I remember his saying that she was of German extraction, and Ihave seen her portrait. She was a very beautiful woman. She died oftyphoid the year before I met him."
"You don't associate his past with any particular part of America?"
"I have heard him talk of Chicago. He knew that city well and hadworked there. I have heard him talk of the coal and iron districts.He had travelled a good deal in his time."
"Was he a politician? Had this secret society to do with politics?"
"No, he cared nothing about politics."
"You have no reason to think it was criminal?"
"On the contrary, I never met a straighter man in my life."
"Was there anything curious about his life in California?"
"He liked best to stay and to work at our claim in the mountains. Hewould never go where other men were if he could help it. That's why Ifirst thought that someone was after him. Then when he left sosuddenly for Europe I made sure that it was so. I believe that he hada warning of some sort. Within a week of his leaving half a dozen menwere inquiring for him."
"What sort of men?"
"Well, they were a mighty hard-looking crowd. They came up to theclaim and wanted to know where he was. I told them that he was goneto Europe and that I did not know where to find him. They meant himno good--it was easy to see that."
"Were these men Americans--Californians?"
"Well, I don't know about Californians. They were Americans, allright. But they were not miners. I don't know what they were, and wasvery glad to see their backs."
"That was six years ago?"
"Nearer seven."
"And then you were together five years in California, so that thisbusiness dates back not less than eleven years at the least?"
"That is so."
"It must be a very serious feud that would be kept up with suchearnestness for as long as that. It would be no light thing thatwould give rise to it."
"I think it shadowed his whole life. It was never quite out of hismind."
"But if a man had a danger hanging over him, and knew what it was,don't you think he would turn to the police for protection?"
"Maybe it was some danger that he could not be protected against.There's one thing you should know. He always went about armed. Hisrevolver was never out of his pocket. But, by bad luck, he was in hisdressing gown and had left it in the bedroom last night. Once thebridge was up, I guess he thought he was safe."
"I should like these dates a little clearer," said MacDonald. "It isquite six years since Douglas left California. You followed him nextyear, did you not?"
"That is so."
"And he had been married five years. You must have returned about thetime of his marriage."
"About a month before. I was his best man."
"Did you know Mrs. Douglas before her marriage?"
"No, I did not. I had been away from England for ten years."
"But you have seen a good deal of her since."
Barker looked sternly at the detective. "I have seen a good deal ofhim since," he answered. "If I have seen her, it is because youcannot visit a man without knowing his wife. If you imagine there isany connection--"
"I imagine nothing, Mr. Barker. I am bound to make every inquirywhich can bear upon the case. But I mean no offense."
"Some inquiries are offensive," Barker answered angrily.
"It's only the facts that we want. It is in your interest andeveryone's interest that they should be cleared up. Did Mr. Douglasentirely approve your friendship with his wife?"
Barker grew paler, and his great, strong hands were claspedconvulsively together. "You have no right to ask such questions!" hecried. "What has this to do with the matter you are investigating?"
"I must repeat the question."
"Well, I refuse to answer."
"You can refuse to answer; but you must be aware that your refusal isin itself an answer, for you would not refuse if you had notsomething to conceal."
Barker stood for a moment with his face set grimly and his strongblack eyebrows drawn low in intense thought. Then he looked up with asmile. "Well, I guess you gentlemen are only doing your clear dutyafter all, and I have no right to stand in the way of it. I'd onlyask you not to worry Mrs. Douglas over this matter; for she hasenough upon her just now. I may tell you that poor Douglas had justone fault in the world, and that was his jealousy. He was fond ofme--no man could be fonder of a friend. And he was devoted to hiswife. He loved me to come here, and was forever sending for me. Andyet if his wife and I talked together or there seemed any sympathybetween us, a kind of wave of jealousy would pass over him, and hewould be off the handle and saying the wildest things in a moment.More than once I've sworn off coming for that reason, and then hewould write me such penitent, imploring letters that I just had to.But you can take it from me, gentlemen, if it was my last word, thatno man ever had a more loving, faithful wife--and I can say also nofriend could be more loyal than I!"
It was spoken with fervour and feeling, and yet Inspector MacDonaldcould not dismiss the subject.
"You are aware," said he, "that the dead man's wedding ring has beentaken from his finger?"
"So it appears," said Barker.
"What do you mean by 'appears'? You know it as a fact."
The man seemed confused and undecided. "When I said 'appears' I meantthat it was conceivable that he had himself taken off the ring."
"The mere fact that the ring should be absent, whoever may haveremoved it, would suggest to anyone's mind, would it not, that themarriage and the tragedy were connected?"
Barker shrugged his broad shoulders. "I can't profess to say what itmeans." he answered. "But if you mean to hint that it could reflectin any way upon this lady's honour"--his eyes blazed for an instant,and then with an evident effort he got a grip upon his ownemotions--"well, you are on the wrong track, that's all."
"I don't know that I've anything else to ask you at present," saidMacDonald, coldly.
"There was one small point," remarked Sherlock Holmes. "When youentered the room there was only a candle lighted on the table, wasthere not?"
"Yes, that was so."
"By its light you saw that some terrible incident had occurred?"
"Exactly."
"You at once rang for help?"
"Yes."
"And it arrived very speedily?"
"Within a minute or so."
"And yet when they arrived they found that the candle was out andthat the lamp had been lighted. That seems very remarkable."
Again Barker showed some signs of indecision. "I don't see that itwas remarkable, Mr. Holmes," he answered after a pause. "The candlethrew a very bad light. My first thought was to get a better one. Thelamp was on the table; so I lit it."
"And blew out the candle?"
"Exactly."
Holmes asked no further question, and Barker, with a deliberate lookfrom one to the other of us, which had, as it seemed to me, somethingof defiance in it, turned and left the room.
Inspector MacDonald had sent up a note to the effect that he wouldwait upon Mrs. Douglas in her room; but she had replied that shewould meet us in the dining room. She entered now, a tall andbeautiful woman of thirty, reserved and self-possessed to aremarkable degree, very different from the tragic and distractedfigure I had pictured. It is true that her face was pale and drawn,like that of one who has endured a great shock; but her manner wascomposed, and the finely moulded hand which she rested upon the edgeof the table was as steady as my own. Her sad, appealing eyestravelled from one to the other of us with a curiously inquisitiveexpression. That questioning gaze transformed itself suddenly intoabrupt speech.
"Have you found anything out yet?" she asked.
Was it my imagination that there was an undertone of fear rather thanof hope in the question?
"We have taken every possible step, Mrs. Douglas," said theinspector. "You may rest assured that nothing will be neglected."
"Spare no money," she said in a dead, even tone. "It is my desirethat every possible effort should be made."
"Perhaps you can tell us something which may throw some light uponthe matter."
"I fear not; but all I know is at your service."
"We have heard from Mr. Cecil Barker that you did not actuallysee--that you were never in the room where the tragedy occurred?"
"No, he turned me back upon the stairs. He begged me to return to myroom."
"Quite so. You had heard the shot, and you had at once come down."
"I put on my dressing gown and then came down."
"How long was it after hearing the shot that you were stopped on thestair by Mr. Barker?"
"It may have been a couple of minutes. It is so hard to reckon timeat such a moment. He implored me not to go on. He assured me that Icould do nothing. Then Mrs. Allen, the housekeeper, led me upstairsagain. It was all like some dreadful dream."
"Can you give us any idea how long your husband had been downstairsbefore you heard the shot?"
"No, I cannot say. He went from his dressing room, and I did not hearhim go. He did the round of the house every night, for he was nervousof fire. It is the only thing that I have ever known him nervous of."
"That is just the point which I want to come to, Mrs. Douglas. Youhave known your husband only in England, have you not?"
"Yes, we have been married five years."
"Have you heard him speak of anything which occurred in America andmight bring some danger upon him?"
Mrs. Douglas thought earnestly before she answered. "Yes." she saidat last, "I have always felt that there was a danger hanging overhim. He refused to discuss it with me. It was not from want ofconfidence in me--there was the most complete love and confidencebetween us--but it was out of his desire to keep all alarm away fromme. He thought I should brood over it if I knew all, and so he wassilent."
"How did you know it, then?"
Mrs. Douglas's face lit with a quick smile. "Can a husband ever carryabout a secret all his life and a woman who loves him have nosuspicion of it? I knew it by his refusal to talk about some episodesin his American life. I knew it by certain precautions he took. Iknew it by certain words he let fall. I knew it by the way he lookedat unexpected strangers. I was perfectly certain that he had somepowerful enemies, that he believed they were on his track, and thathe was always on his guard against them. I was so sure of it that foryears I have been terrified if ever he came home later than wasexpected."
"Might I ask," asked Holmes, "what the words were which attractedyour attention?"
"The Valley of Fear," the lady answered. "That was an expression hehas used when I questioned him. 'I have been in the Valley of Fear. Iam not out of it yet.'--'Are we never to get out of the Valley ofFear?' I have asked him when I have seen him more serious than usual.'Sometimes I think that we never shall,' he has answered."
"Surely you asked him what he meant by the Valley of Fear?"
"I did; but his face would become very grave and he would shake hishead. 'It is bad enough that one of us should have been in itsshadow,' he said. 'Please God it shall never fall upon you!' It wassome real valley in which he had lived and in which somethingterrible had occurred to him, of that I am certain; but I can tellyou no more."
"And he never mentioned any names?"
"Yes, he was delirious with fever once when he had his huntingaccident three years ago. Then I remember that there was a name thatcame continually to his lips. He spoke it with anger and a sort ofhorror. McGinty was the name--Bodymaster McGinty. I asked him when herecovered who Bodymaster McGinty was, and whose body he was masterof. 'Never of mine, thank God!' he answered with a laugh, and thatwas all I could get from him. But there is a connection betweenBodymaster McGinty and the Valley of Fear."
"There is one other point," said Inspector MacDonald. "You met Mr.Douglas in a boarding house in London, did you not, and becameengaged to him there? Was there any romance, anything secret ormysterious, about the wedding?"
"There was romance. There is always romance. There was nothingmysterious."
"He had no rival?"
"No, I was quite free."
"You have heard, no doubt, that his wedding ring has been taken. Doesthat suggest anything to you? Suppose that some enemy of his old lifehad tracked him down and committed this crime, what possible reasoncould he have for taking his wedding ring?"
For an instant I could have sworn that the faintest shadow of a smileflickered over the woman's lips.
"I really cannot tell," she answered. "It is certainly a mostextraordinary thing."
"Well, we will not detain you any longer, and we are sorry to haveput you to this trouble at such a time," said the inspector. "Thereare some other points, no doubt; but we can refer to you as theyarise."
She rose, and I was again conscious of that quick, questioning glancewith which she had just surveyed us. "What impression has my evidencemade upon you?" The question might as well have been spoken. Then,with a bow, she swept from the room.
"She's a beautiful woman--a very beautiful woman," said MacDonaldthoughtfully, after the door had closed behind her. "This man Barkerhas certainly been down here a good deal. He is a man who might beattractive to a woman. He admits that the dead man was jealous, andmaybe he knew best himself what cause he had for jealousy. Thenthere's that wedding ring. You can't get past that. The man who tearsa wedding ring off a dead man's--What do you say to it, Mr. Holmes?"
My friend had sat with his head upon his hands, sunk in the deepestthought. Now he rose and rang the bell. "Ames," he said, when thebutler entered, "where is Mr. Cecil Barker now?"
"I'll see, sir."
He came back in a moment to say that Barker was in the garden.
"Can you remember, Ames, what Mr. Barker had on his feet last nightwhen you joined him in the study?"
"Yes, Mr. Holmes. He had a pair of bedroom slippers. I brought himhis boots when he went for the police."
"Where are the slippers now?"
"They are still under the chair in the hall."
"Very good, Ames. It is, of course, important for us to know whichtracks may be Mr. Barker's and which from outside."
"Yes, sir. I may say that I noticed that the slippers were stainedwith blood--so indeed were my own."
"That is natural enough, considering the condition of the room. Verygood, Ames. We will ring if we want you."
A few minutes later we were in the study. Holmes had brought with himthe carpet slippers from the hall. As Ames had observed, the soles ofboth were dark with blood.
"Strange!" murmured Holmes, as he stood in the light of the windowand examined them minutely. "Very strange indeed!"
Stooping with one of his quick feline pounces, he placed the slipperupon the blood mark on the sill. It exactly corresponded. He smiledin silence at his colleagues.
The inspector was transfigured with excitement. His native accentrattled like a stick upon railings.
"Man," he cried, "there's not a doubt of it! Barker has just markedthe window himself. It's a good deal broader than any bootmark. Imind that you said it was a splay-foot, and here's the explanation.But what's the game, Mr. Holmes--what's the game?"
"Ay, what's the game?" my friend repeated thoughtfully.
White Mason chuckled and rubbed his fat hands together in hisprofessional satisfaction. "I said it was a snorter!" he cried. "Anda real snorter it is!"




     CHAPTER VI     A Dawning Light

The three detectives had many matters of detail into which toinquire; so I returned alone to our modest quarters at the villageinn. But before doing so I took a stroll in the curious old-worldgarden which flanked the house. Rows of very ancient yew trees cutinto strange designs girded it round. Inside was a beautiful stretchof lawn with an old sundial in the middle, the whole effect sosoothing and restful that it was welcome to my somewhat janglednerves.
In that deeply peaceful atmosphere one could forget, or remember onlyas some fantastic nightmare, that darkened study with the sprawling,bloodstained figure on the floor. And yet, as I strolled round it andtried to steep my soul in its gentle balm, a strange incidentoccurred, which brought me back to the tragedy and left a sinisterimpression in my mind.
I have said that a decoration of yew trees circled the garden. At theend farthest from the house they thickened into a continuous hedge.On the other side of this hedge, concealed from the eyes of anyoneapproaching from the direction of the house, there was a stone seat.As I approached the spot I was aware of voices, some remark in thedeep tones of a man, answered by a little ripple of femininelaughter.
An instant later I had come round the end of the hedge and my eyeslit upon Mrs. Douglas and the man Barker before they were aware of mypresence. Her appearance gave me a shock. In the dining-room she hadbeen demure and discreet. Now all pretense of grief had passed awayfrom her. Her eyes shone with the joy of living, and her face stillquivered with amusement at some remark of her companion. He satforward, his hands clasped and his forearms on his knees, with ananswering smile upon his bold, handsome face. In an instant--but itwas just one instant too late--they resumed their solemn masks as myfigure came into view. A hurried word or two passed between them, andthen Barker rose and came towards me.
"Excuse me, sir," said he, "but am I addressing Dr. Watson?"
I bowed with a coldness which showed, I dare say, very plainly theimpression which had been produced upon my mind.
"We thought that it was probably you, as your friendship with Mr.Sherlock Holmes is so well known. Would you mind coming over andspeaking to Mrs. Douglas for one instant?"
I followed him with a dour face. Very clearly I could see in mymind's eye that shattered figure on the floor. Here within a fewhours of the tragedy were his wife and his nearest friend laughingtogether behind a bush in the garden which had been his. I greetedthe lady with reserve. I had grieved with her grief in thedining-room. Now I met her appealing gaze with an unresponsive eye.
"I fear that you think me callous and hard-hearted," said she.
I shrugged my shoulders. "It is no business of mine," said I.
"Perhaps some day you will do me justice. If you only realized--"
"There is no need why Dr. Watson should realize," said Barkerquickly. "As he has himself said, it is no possible business of his."
"Exactly," said I, "and so I will beg leave to resume my walk."
"One moment, Dr. Watson," cried the woman in a pleading voice. "Thereis one question which you can answer with more authority than anyoneelse in the world, and it may make a very great difference to me. Youknow Mr. Holmes and his relations with the police better than anyoneelse can. Supposing that a matter were brought confidentially to hisknowledge, is it absolutely necessary that he should pass it on tothe detectives?"
"Yes, that's it," said Barker eagerly. "Is he on his own or is heentirely in with them?"
"I really don't know that I should be justified in discussing such apoint."
"I beg--I implore that you will, Dr. Watson! I assure you that youwill be helping us--helping me greatly if you will guide us on thatpoint."
There was such a ring of sincerity in the woman's voice that for theinstant I forgot all about her levity and was moved only to do herwill.
"Mr. Holmes is an independent investigator," I said. "He is his ownmaster, and would act as his own judgment directed. At the same time,he would naturally feel loyalty towards the officials who wereworking on the same case, and he would not conceal from them anythingwhich would help them in bringing a criminal to justice. Beyond thisI can say nothing, and I would refer you to Mr. Holmes himself if youwanted fuller information."
So saying I raised my hat and went upon my way, leaving them stillseated behind that concealing hedge. I looked back as I rounded thefar end of it, and saw that they were still talking very earnestlytogether, and, as they were gazing after me, it was clear that it wasour interview that was the subject of their debate.
"I wish none of their confidences," said Holmes, when I reported tohim what had occurred. He had spent the whole afternoon at the ManorHouse in consultation with his two colleagues, and returned aboutfive with a ravenous appetite for a high tea which I had ordered forhim. "No confidences, Watson; for they are mighty awkward if it comesto an arrest for conspiracy and murder."
"You think it will come to that?"
He was in his most cheerful and debonair humour. "My dear Watson,when I have exterminated that fourth egg I shall be ready to put youin touch with the whole situation. I don't say that we have fathomedit--far from it--but when we have traced the missing dumb-bell--"
"The dumb-bell!"
"Dear me, Watson, is it possible that you have not penetrated thefact that the case hangs upon the missing dumb-bell? Well, well, youneed not be downcast; for between ourselves I don't think that eitherInspector Mac or the excellent local practitioner has grasped theoverwhelming importance of this incident. One dumb-bell, Watson!Consider an athlete with one dumb-bell! Picture to yourself theunilateral development, the imminent danger of a spinal curvature.Shocking, Watson, shocking!"
He sat with his mouth full of toast and his eyes sparkling withmischief, watching my intellectual entanglement. The mere sight ofhis excellent appetite was an assurance of success, for I had veryclear recollections of days and nights without a thought of food,when his baffled mind had chafed before some problem while his thin,eager features became more attenuated with the asceticism of completemental concentration. Finally he lit his pipe, and sitting in theinglenook of the old village inn he talked slowly and at random abouthis case, rather as one who thinks aloud than as one who makes aconsidered statement.
"A lie, Watson--a great, big, thumping, obtrusive, uncompromisinglie--that's what meets us on the threshold! There is our startingpoint. The whole story told by Barker is a lie. But Barker's story iscorroborated by Mrs. Douglas. Therefore she is lying also. They areboth lying, and in a conspiracy. So now we have the clear problem.Why are they lying, and what is the truth which they are trying sohard to conceal? Let us try, Watson, you and I, if we can get behindthe lie and reconstruct the truth.
"How do I know that they are lying? Because it is a clumsyfabrication which simply could not be true. Consider! According tothe story given to us, the assassin had less than a minute after themurder had been committed to take that ring, which was under anotherring, from the dead man's finger, to replace the other ring--a thingwhich he would surely never have done--and to put that singular cardbeside his victim. I say that this was obviously impossible.
"You may argue--but I have too much respect for your judgment,Watson, to think that you will do so--that the ring may have beentaken before the man was killed. The fact that the candle had beenlit only a short time shows that there had been no lengthy interview.Was Douglas, from what we hear of his fearless character, a man whowould be likely to give up his wedding ring at such short notice, orcould we conceive of his giving it up at all? No, no, Watson, theassassin was alone with the dead man for some time with the lamp lit.Of that I have no doubt at all.
"But the gunshot was apparently the cause of death. Therefore theshot must have been fired some time earlier than we are told. Butthere could be no mistake about such a matter as that. We are in thepresence, therefore, of a deliberate conspiracy upon the part of thetwo people who heard the gunshot--of the man Barker and of the womanDouglas. When on the top of this I am able to show that the bloodmark on the windowsill was deliberately placed there by Barker, inorder to give a false clue to the police, you will admit that thecase grows dark against him.
"Now we have to ask ourselves at what hour the murder actually didoccur. Up to half-past ten the servants were moving about the house;so it was certainly not before that time. At a quarter to eleven theyhad all gone to their rooms with the exception of Ames, who was inthe pantry. I have been trying some experiments after you left usthis afternoon, and I find that no noise which MacDonald can make inthe study can penetrate to me in the pantry when the doors are allshut.
"It is otherwise, however, from the housekeeper's room. It is not sofar down the corridor, and from it I could vaguely hear a voice whenit was very loudly raised. The sound from a shotgun is to some extentmuffled when the discharge is at very close range, as it undoubtedlywas in this instance. It would not be very loud, and yet in thesilence of the night it should have easily penetrated to Mrs. Allen'sroom. She is, as she has told us, somewhat deaf; but none the lessshe mentioned in her evidence that she did hear something like a doorslamming half an hour before the alarm was given. Half an hour beforethe alarm was given would be a quarter to eleven. I have no doubtthat what she heard was the report of the gun, and that this was thereal instant of the murder.
"If this is so, we have now to determine what Barker and Mrs.Douglas, presuming that they are not the actual murderers, could havebeen doing from quarter to eleven, when the sound of the shot broughtthem down, until quarter past eleven, when they rang the bell andsummoned the servants. What were they doing, and why did they notinstantly give the alarm? That is the question which faces us, andwhen it has been answered we shall surely have gone some way to solveour problem."
"I am convinced myself," said I, "that there is an understandingbetween those two people. She must be a heartless creature to sitlaughing at some jest within a few hours of her husband's murder."
"Exactly. She does not shine as a wife even in her own account ofwhat occurred. I am not a whole-souled admirer of womankind, as youare aware, Watson, but my experience of life has taught me that thereare few wives, having any regard for their husbands, who would letany man's spoken word stand between them and that husband's deadbody. Should I ever marry, Watson, I should hope to inspire my wifewith some feeling which would prevent her from being walked off by ahousekeeper when my corpse was lying within a few yards of her. Itwas badly stage-managed; for even the rawest investigators must bestruck by the absence of the usual feminine ululation. If there hadbeen nothing else, this incident alone would have suggested aprearranged conspiracy to my mind."
"You think then, definitely, that Barker and Mrs. Douglas are guiltyof the murder?"
"There is an appalling directness about your questions, Watson," saidHolmes, shaking his pipe at me. "They come at me like bullets. If youput it that Mrs. Douglas and Barker know the truth about the murder,and are conspiring to conceal it, then I can give you a whole-souledanswer. I am sure they do. But your more deadly proposition is not soclear. Let us for a moment consider the difficulties which stand inthe way.
"We will suppose that this couple are united by the bonds of a guiltylove, and that they have determined to get rid of the man who standsbetween them. It is a large supposition; for discreet inquiry amongservants and others has failed to corroborate it in any way. On thecontrary, there is a good deal of evidence that the Douglases werevery attached to each other."
"That, I am sure, cannot he true." said I, thinking of the beautifulsmiling face in the garden.
"Well at least they gave that impression. However, we will supposethat they are an extraordinarily astute couple, who deceive everyoneupon this point, and conspire to murder the husband. He happens to bea man over whose head some danger hangs--"
"We have only their word for that."
Holmes looked thoughtful. "I see, Watson. You are sketching out atheory by which everything they say from the beginning is false.According to your idea, there was never any hidden menace, or secretsociety, or Valley of Fear, or Boss MacSomebody, or anything else.Well, that is a good sweeping generalization. Let us see what thatbrings us to. They invent this theory to account for the crime. Theythen play up to the idea by leaving this bicycle in the park as proofof the existence of some outsider. The stain on the windowsillconveys the same idea. So does the card on the body, which might havebeen prepared in the house. That all fits into your hypothesis,Watson. But now we come on the nasty, angular, uncompromising bitswhich won't slip into their places. Why a cut-off shotgun of allweapons--and an American one at that? How could they be so sure thatthe sound of it would not bring someone on to them? It's a merechance as it is that Mrs. Allen did not start out to inquire for theslamming door. Why did your guilty couple do all this, Watson?"
"I confess that I can't explain it."
"Then again, if a woman and her lover conspire to murder a husband,are they going to advertise their guilt by ostentatiously removinghis wedding ring after his death? Does that strike you as veryprobable, Watson?"
"No, it does not."
"And once again, if the thought of leaving a bicycle concealedoutside had occurred to you, would it really have seemed worth doingwhen the dullest detective would naturally say this is an obviousblind, as the bicycle is the first thing which the fugitive needed inorder to make his escape."
"I can conceive of no explanation."
"And yet there should be no combination of events for which the witof man cannot conceive an explanation. Simply as a mental exercise,without any assertion that it is true, let me indicate a possibleline of thought. It is, I admit, mere imagination; but how often isimagination the mother of truth?
"We will suppose that there was a guilty secret, a really shamefulsecret in the life of this man Douglas. This leads to his murder bysomeone who is, we will suppose, an avenger, someone from outside.This avenger, for some reason which I confess I am still at a loss toexplain, took the dead man's wedding ring. The vendetta mightconceivably date back to the man's first marriage, and the ring betaken for some such reason.
"Before this avenger got away, Barker and the wife had reached theroom. The assassin convinced them that any attempt to arrest himwould lead to the publication of some hideous scandal. They wereconverted to this idea, and preferred to let him go. For this purposethey probably lowered the bridge, which can be done quitenoiselessly, and then raised it again. He made his escape, and forsome reason thought that he could do so more safely on foot than onthe bicycle. He therefore left his machine where it would not bediscovered until he had got safely away. So far we are within thebounds of possibility, are we not?"
"Well, it is possible, no doubt," said I, with some reserve.
"We have to remember, Watson, that whatever occurred is certainlysomething very extraordinary. Well, now, to continue oursupposititious case, the couple--not necessarily a guiltycouple--realize after the murderer is gone that they have placedthemselves in a position in which it may be difficult for them toprove that they did not themselves either do the deed or connive atit. They rapidly and rather clumsily met the situation. The mark wasput by Barker's bloodstained slipper upon the window-sill to suggesthow the fugitive got away. They obviously were the two who must haveheard the sound of the gun; so they gave the alarm exactly as theywould have done, but a good half hour after the event."
"And how do you propose to prove all this?"
"Well, if there were an outsider, he may be traced and taken. Thatwould be the most effective of all proofs. But if not--well, theresources of science are far from being exhausted. I think that anevening alone in that study would help me much."
"An evening alone!"
"I propose to go up there presently. I have arranged it with theestimable Ames, who is by no means whole-hearted about Barker. Ishall sit in that room and see if its atmosphere brings meinspiration. I'm a believer in the genius loci. You smile, FriendWatson. Well, we shall see. By the way, you have that big umbrella ofyours, have you not?"
"It is here."
"Well, I'll borrow that if I may."
"Certainly--but what a wretched weapon! If there is danger--"
"Nothing serious, my dear Watson, or I should certainly ask for yourassistance. But I'll take the umbrella. At present I am only awaitingthe return of our colleagues from Tunbridge Wells, where they are atpresent engaged in trying for a likely owner to the bicycle."
It was nightfall before Inspector MacDonald and White Mason came backfrom their expedition, and they arrived exultant, reporting a greatadvance in our investigation.
"Man, I'll admeet that I had my doubts if there was ever anoutsider," said MacDonald, "but that's all past now. We've had thebicycle identified, and we have a description of our man; so that's along step on our journey."
"It sounds to me like the beginning of the end," said Holmes. "I'msure I congratulate you both with all my heart."
"Well, I started from the fact that Mr. Douglas had seemed disturbedsince the day before, when he had been at Tunbridge Wells. It was atTunbridge Wells then that he had become conscious of some danger. Itwas clear, therefore, that if a man had come over with a bicycle itwas from Tunbridge Wells that he might be expected to have come. Wetook the bicycle over with us and showed it at the hotels. It wasidentified at once by the manager of the Eagle Commercial asbelonging to a man named Hargrave, who had taken a room there twodays before. This bicycle and a small valise were his wholebelongings. He had registered his name as coming from London, but hadgiven no address. The valise was London made, and the contents wereBritish; but the man himself was undoubtedly an American."
"Well, well," said Holmes gleefully, "you have indeed done some solidwork while I have been sitting spinning theories with my friend! It'sa lesson in being practical, Mr. Mac."
"Ay, it's just that, Mr. Holmes," said the inspector withsatisfaction.
"But this may all fit in with your theories," I remarked.
"That may or may not be. But let us hear the end, Mr. Mac. Was therenothing to identify this man?"
"So little that it was evident that he had carefully guarded himselfagainst identification. There were no papers or letters, and nomarking upon the clothes. A cycle map of the county lay on hisbedroom table. He had left the hotel after breakfast yesterdaymorning on his bicycle, and no more was heard of him until ourinquiries."
"That's what puzzles me, Mr. Holmes," said White Mason. "If thefellow did not want the hue and cry raised over him, one wouldimagine that he would have returned and remained at the hotel as aninoffensive tourist. As it is, he must know that he will be reportedto the police by the hotel manager and that his disappearance will beconnected with the murder."
"So one would imagine. Still, he has been justified of his wisdom upto date, at any rate, since he has not been taken. But hisdescription--what of that?"
MacDonald referred to his notebook. "Here we have it so far as theycould give it. They don't seem to have taken any very particularstock of him; but still the porter, the clerk, and the chambermaidare all agreed that this about covers the points. He was a man aboutfive foot nine in height, fifty or so years of age, his hair slightlygrizzled, a grayish moustache, a curved nose, and a face which all ofthem described as fierce and forbidding."
"Well, bar the expression, that might almost be a description ofDouglas himself," said Holmes. "He is just over fifty, with grizzledhair and moustache, and about the same height. Did you get anythingelse?"
"He was dressed in a heavy gray suit with a reefer jacket, and hewore a short yellow overcoat and a soft cap."
"What about the shotgun?"
"It is less than two feet long. It could very well have fitted intohis valise. He could have carried it inside his overcoat withoutdifficulty."
"And how do you consider that all this bears upon the general case?"
"Well, Mr. Holmes," said MacDonald, "when we have got our man--andyou may be sure that I had his description on the wires within fiveminutes of hearing it--we shall be better able to judge. But, even asit stands, we have surely gone a long way. We know that an Americancalling himself Hargrave came to Tunbridge Wells two days ago withbicycle and valise. In the latter was a sawed-off shotgun; so he camewith the deliberate purpose of crime. Yesterday morning he set offfor this place on his bicycle, with his gun concealed in hisovercoat. No one saw him arrive, so far as we can learn; but he neednot pass through the village to reach the park gates, and there aremany cyclists upon the road. Presumably he at once concealed hiscycle among the laurels where it was found, and possibly lurked therehimself, with his eye on the house, waiting for Mr. Douglas to comeout. The shotgun is a strange weapon to use inside a house; but hehad intended to use it outside, and there it has very obviousadvantages, as it would be impossible to miss with it, and the soundof shots is so common in an English sporting neighbourhood that noparticular notice would be taken."
"That is all very clear," said Holmes.
"Well, Mr. Douglas did not appear. What was he to do next? He lefthis bicycle and approached the house in the twilight. He found thebridge down and no one about. He took his chance, intending, nodoubt, to make some excuse if he met anyone. He met no one. Heslipped into the first room that he saw, and concealed himself behindthe curtain. Thence he could see the drawbridge go up, and he knewthat his only escape was through the moat. He waited untilquarter-past eleven, when Mr. Douglas upon his usual nightly roundcame into the room. He shot him and escaped, as arranged. He wasaware that the bicycle would be described by the hotel people and bea clue against him; so he left it there and made his way by someother means to London or to some safe hiding place which he hadalready arranged. How is that, Mr. Holmes?"
"Well, Mr. Mac, it is very good and very clear so far as it goes.That is your end of the story. My end is that the crime was committedhalf an hour earlier than reported; that Mrs. Douglas and Barker areboth in a conspiracy to conceal something; that they aided themurderer's escape--or at least that they reached the room before heescaped--and that they fabricated evidence of his escape through thewindow, whereas in all probability they had themselves let him go bylowering the bridge. That's my reading of the first half."
The two detectives shook their heads.
"Well, Mr. Holmes, if this is true, we only tumble out of one mysteryinto another," said the London inspector.
"And in some ways a worse one," added White Mason. "The lady hasnever been in America in all her life. What possible connection couldshe have with an American assassin which would cause her to shelterhim?"
"I freely admit the difficulties," said Holmes. "I propose to make alittle investigation of my own to-night, and it is just possible thatit may contribute something to the common cause."
"Can we help you, Mr. Holmes?"
"No, no! Darkness and Dr. Watson's umbrella--my wants are simple. AndAmes, the faithful Ames, no doubt he will stretch a point for me. Allmy lines of thought lead me back invariably to the one basicquestion--why should an athletic man develop his frame upon sounnatural an instrument as a single dumb-bell?"
It was late that night when Holmes returned from his solitaryexcursion. We slept in a double-bedded room, which was the best thatthe little country inn could do for us. I was already asleep when Iwas partly awakened by his entrance.
"Well, Holmes," I murmured, "have you found anything out?"
He stood beside me in silence, his candle in his hand. Then the tall,lean figure inclined towards me. "I say, Watson," he whispered,"would you be afraid to sleep in the same room with a lunatic, a manwith softening of the brain, an idiot whose mind has lost its grip?"
"Not in the least," I answered in astonishment.
"Ah, that's lucky," he said, and not another word would he utter thatnight.




     CHAPTER VII     The Solution

Next morning, after breakfast, we found Inspector MacDonald and WhiteMason seated in close consultation in the small parlour of the localpolice sergeant. On the table in front of them were piled a number ofletters and telegrams, which they were carefully sorting anddocketing. Three had been placed on one side.
"Still on the track of the elusive bicyclist?" Holmes askedcheerfully. "What is the latest news of the ruffian?"
MacDonald pointed ruefully to his heap of correspondence.
"He is at present reported from Leicester, Nottingham, Southampton,Derby, East Ham, Richmond, and fourteen other places. In three ofthem--East Ham, Leicester, and Liverpool--there is a clear caseagainst him, and he has actually been arrested. The country seems tobe full of the fugitives with yellow coats."
"Dear me!" said Holmes sympathetically. "Now, Mr. Mac and you, Mr.White Mason, I wish to give you a very earnest piece of advice. WhenI went into this case with you I bargained, as you will no doubtremember, that I should not present you with half-proved theories,but that I should retain and work out my own ideas until I hadsatisfied myself that they were correct. For this reason I am not atthe present moment telling you all that is in my mind. On the otherhand, I said that I would play the game fairly by you, and I do notthink it is a fair game to allow you for one unnecessary moment towaste your energies upon a profitless task. Therefore I am here toadvise you this morning, and my advice to you is summed up in threewords--abandon the case."
MacDonald and White Mason stared in amazement at their celebratedcolleague.
"You consider it hopeless!" cried the inspector.
"I consider your case to be hopeless. I do not consider that it ishopeless to arrive at the truth."
"But this cyclist. He is not an invention. We have his description,his valise, his bicycle. The fellow must be somewhere. Why should wenot get him?"
"Yes, yes, no doubt he is somewhere, and no doubt we shall get him;but I would not have you waste your energies in East Ham orLiverpool. I am sure that we can find some shorter cut to a result."
"You are holding something back. It's hardly fair of you, Mr.Holmes." The inspector was annoyed.
"You know my methods of work, Mr. Mac. But I will hold it back forthe shortest time possible. I only wish to verify my details in oneway, which can very readily be done, and then I make my bow andreturn to London, leaving my results entirely at your service. I oweyou too much to act otherwise; for in all my experience I cannotrecall any more singular and interesting study."
"This is clean beyond me, Mr. Holmes. We saw you when we returnedfrom Tunbridge Wells last night, and you were in general agreementwith our results. What has happened since then to give you acompletely new idea of the case?"
"Well, since you ask me, I spent, as I told you that I would, somehours last night at the Manor House."
"Well, what happened?"
"Ah, I can only give you a very general answer to that for themoment. By the way, I have been reading a short but clear andinteresting account of the old building, purchasable at the modestsum of one penny from the local tobacconist."
Here Holmes drew a small tract, embellished with a rude engraving ofthe ancient Manor House, from his waistcoat pocket.
"It immensely adds to the zest of an investigation, my dear Mr. Mac,when one is in conscious sympathy with the historical atmosphere ofone's surroundings. Don't look so impatient; for I assure you thateven so bald an account as this raises some sort of picture of thepast in one's mind. Permit me to give you a sample. 'Erected in thefifth year of the reign of James I, and standing upon the site of amuch older building, the Manor House of Birlstone presents one of thefinest surviving examples of the moated Jacobean residence--' "
"You are making fools of us, Mr. Holmes!"
"Tut, tut, Mr. Mac!--the first sign of temper I have detected in you.Well, I won't read it verbatim, since you feel so strongly upon thesubject. But when I tell you that there is some account of the takingof the place by a parliamentary colonel in 1644, of the concealmentof Charles for several days in the course of the Civil War, andfinally of a visit there by the second George, you will admit thatthere are various associations of interest connected with thisancient house."
"I don't doubt it, Mr. Holmes; but that is no business of ours."
"Is it not? Is it not? Breadth of view, my dear Mr. Mac, is one ofthe essentials of our profession. The interplay of ideas and theoblique uses of knowledge are often of extraordinary interest. Youwill excuse these remarks from one who, though a mere connoisseur ofcrime, is still rather older and perhaps more experienced thanyourself."
"I'm the first to admit that," said the detective heartily. "You getto your point, I admit; but you have such a deuced round-the-cornerway of doing it."
"Well, well, I'll drop past history and get down to present-dayfacts. I called last night, as I have already said, at the ManorHouse. I did not see either Barker or Mrs. Douglas. I saw nonecessity to disturb them; but I was pleased to hear that the ladywas not visibly pining and that she had partaken of an excellentdinner. My visit was specially made to the good Mr. Ames, with whom Iexchanged some amiabilities, which culminated in his allowing me,without reference to anyone else, to sit alone for a time in thestudy."
"What! With that?" I ejaculated.
"No, no, everything is now in order. You gave permission for that,Mr. Mac, as I am informed. The room was in its normal state, and init I passed an instructive quarter of an hour."
"What were you doing?"
"Well, not to make a mystery of so simple a matter, I was looking forthe missing dumb-bell. It has always bulked rather large in myestimate of the case. I ended by finding it."
"Where?"
"Ah, there we come to the edge of the unexplored. Let me go a littlefurther, a very little further, and I will promise that you shallshare everything that I know."
"Well, we're bound to take you on your own terms," said theinspector; "but when it comes to telling us to abandon the case--whyin the name of goodness should we abandon the case?"
"For the simple reason, my dear Mr. Mac, that you have not got thefirst idea what it is that you are investigating."
"We are investigating the murder of Mr. John Douglas of BirlstoneManor."
"Yes, yes, so you are. But don't trouble to trace the mysteriousgentleman upon the bicycle. I assure you that it won't help you."
"Then what do you suggest that we do?"
"I will tell you exactly what to do, if you will do it."
"Well, I'm bound to say I've always found you had reason behind allyour queer ways. I'll do what you advise."
"And you, Mr. White Mason?"
The country detective looked helplessly from one to the other. Holmesand his methods were new to him. "Well, if it is good enough for theinspector, it is good enough for me," he said at last.
"Capital!" said Holmes. "Well, then, I should recommend a nice,cheery country walk for both of you. They tell me that the views fromBirlstone Ridge over the Weald are very remarkable. No doubt lunchcould be got at some suitable hostelry; though my ignorance of thecountry prevents me from recommending one. In the evening, tired buthappy--"
"Man, this is getting past a joke!" cried MacDonald, rising angrilyfrom his chair.
"Well, well, spend the day as you like," said Holmes, patting himcheerfully upon the shoulder. "Do what you like and go where youwill, but meet me here before dusk without fail--without fail, Mr.Mac."
"That sounds more like sanity."
"All of it was excellent advice; but I don't insist, so long as youare here when I need you. But now, before we part, I want you towrite a note to Mr. Barker."
"Well?"
"I'll dictate it, if you like. Ready?
"Dear Sir:"It has struck me that it is our duty to drain the moat, in the hopethat we may find some--"
"It's impossible," said the inspector. "I've made inquiry."
"Tut, tut! My dear sir, please do what I ask you."
"Well, go on."
"--in the hope that we may find something which may bear upon ourinvestigation. I have made arrangements, and the workmen will be atwork early to-morrow morning diverting the stream--"
"Impossible!"
"--diverting the stream; so I thought it best to explain mattersbeforehand.
"Now sign that, and send it by hand about four o'clock. At that hourwe shall meet again in this room. Until then we may each do what welike; for I can assure you that this inquiry has come to a definitepause."
Evening was drawing in when we reassembled. Holmes was very seriousin his manner, myself curious, and the detectives obviously criticaland annoyed.
"Well, gentlemen," said my friend gravely, "I am asking you now toput everything to the test with me, and you will judge for yourselveswhether the observations I have made justify the conclusions to whichI have come. It is a chill evening, and I do not know how long ourexpedition may last; so I beg that you will wear your warmest coats.It is of the first importance that we should be in our places beforeit grows dark; so with your permission we shall get started at once."
We passed along the outer bounds of the Manor House park until wecame to a place where there was a gap in the rails which fenced it.Through this we slipped, and then in the gathering gloom we followedHolmes until we had reached a shrubbery which lies nearly opposite tothe main door and the drawbridge. The latter had not been raised.Holmes crouched down behind the screen of laurels, and we all threefollowed his example.
"Well, what are we to do now?" asked MacDonald with some gruffness.
"Possess our souls in patience and make as little noise as possible,"Holmes answered.
"What are we here for at all? I really think that you might treat uswith more frankness."
Holmes laughed. "Watson insists that I am the dramatist in reallife," said he. "Some touch of the artist wells up within me, andcalls insistently for a well-staged performance. Surely ourprofession, Mr. Mac, would be a drab and sordid one if we did notsometimes set the scene so as to glorify our results. The bluntaccusation, the brutal tap upon the shoulder--what can one make ofsuch a dnouement? But the quick inference, the subtle trap, theclever forecast of coming events, the triumphant vindication of boldtheories--are these not the pride and the justification of our life'swork? At the present moment you thrill with the glamour of thesituation and the anticipation of the hunt. Where would be thatthrill if I had been as definite as a timetable? I only ask a littlepatience, Mr. Mac, and all will be clear to you."
"Well, I hope the pride and justification and the rest of it willcome before we all get our death of cold," said the London detectivewith comic resignation.
We all had good reason to join in the aspiration; for our vigil was along and bitter one. Slowly the shadows darkened over the long,sombre face of the old house. A cold, damp reek from the moat chilledus to the bones and set our teeth chattering. There was a single lampover the gateway and a steady globe of light in the fatal study.Everything else was dark and still.
"How long is this to last?" asked the inspector finally. "And what isit we are watching for?"
"I have no more notion than you how long it is to last," Holmesanswered with some asperity. "If criminals would always scheduletheir movements like railway trains, it would certainly be moreconvenient for all of us. As to what it is we--Well, that's what weare watching for!"
As he spoke the bright, yellow light in the study was obscured bysomebody passing to and fro before it. The laurels among which we laywere immediately opposite the window and not more than a hundred feetfrom it. Presently it was thrown open with a whining of hinges, andwe could dimly see the dark outline of a man's head and shoulderslooking out into the gloom. For some minutes he peered forth infurtive, stealthy fashion, as one who wishes to be assured that he isunobserved. Then he leaned forward, and in the intense silence wewere aware of the soft lapping of agitated water. He seemed to bestirring up the moat with something which he held in his hand. Thensuddenly he hauled something in as a fisherman lands a fish--somelarge, round object which obscured the light as it was draggedthrough the open casement.
"Now!" cried Holmes. "Now!"
We were all upon our feet, staggering after him with our stiffenedlimbs, while he ran swiftly across the bridge and rang violently atthe bell. There was the rasping of bolts from the other side, and theamazed Ames stood in the entrance. Holmes brushed him aside without aword and, followed by all of us, rushed into the room which had beenoccupied by the man whom we had been watching.
The oil lamp on the table represented the glow which we had seen fromoutside. It was now in the hand of Cecil Barker, who held it towardsus as we entered. Its light shone upon his strong, resolute,clean-shaved face and his menacing eyes.
"What the devil is the meaning of all this?" he cried. "What are youafter, anyhow?"
Holmes took a swift glance round, and then pounced upon a soddenbundle tied together with cord which lay where it had been thrustunder the writing table.
"This is what we are after, Mr. Barker--this bundle, weighted with adumb-bell, which you have just raised from the bottom of the moat."
Barker stared at Holmes with amazement in his face. "How in thundercame you to know anything about it?" he asked.
"Simply that I put it there."
"You put it there! You!"
"Perhaps I should have said 'replaced it there,'" said Holmes. "Youwill remember, Inspector MacDonald, that I was somewhat struck by theabsence of a dumb-bell. I drew your attention to it; but with thepressure of other events you had hardly the time to give it theconsideration which would have enabled you to draw deductions fromit. When water is near and a weight is missing it is not a veryfar-fetched supposition that something has been sunk in the water.The idea was at least worth testing; so with the help of Ames, whoadmitted me to the room, and the crook of Dr. Watson's umbrella, Iwas able last night to fish up and inspect this bundle.
"It was of the first importance, however, that we should be able toprove who placed it there. This we accomplished by the very obviousdevice of announcing that the moat would be dried to-morrow, whichhad, of course, the effect that whoever had hidden the bundle wouldmost certainly withdraw it the moment that darkness enabled him to doso. We have no less than four witnesses as to who it was who tookadvantage of the opportunity, and so, Mr. Barker, I think the wordlies now with you."
Sherlock Holmes put the sopping bundle upon the table beside the lampand undid the cord which bound it. From within he extracted adumb-bell, which he tossed down to its fellow in the corner. Next hedrew forth a pair of boots. "American, as you perceive," he remarked,pointing to the toes. Then he laid upon the table a long, deadly,sheathed knife. Finally he unravelled a bundle of clothing,comprising a complete set of underclothes, socks, a gray tweed suit,and a short yellow overcoat.
"The clothes are commonplace," remarked Holmes, "save only theovercoat, which is full of suggestive touches." He held it tenderlytowards the light. "Here, as you perceive, is the inner pocketprolonged into the lining in such fashion as to give ample space forthe truncated fowling piece. The tailor's tab is on the neck--'Neal,Outfitter, Vermissa, U. S. A.' I have spent an instructive afternoonin the rector's library, and have enlarged my knowledge by adding thefact that Vermissa is a flourishing little town at the head of one ofthe best known coal and iron valleys in the United States. I havesome recollection, Mr. Barker, that you associated the coal districtswith Mr. Douglas's first wife, and it would surely not be toofar-fetched an inference that the V. V. upon the card by the deadbody might stand for Vermissa Valley, or that this very valley whichsends forth emissaries of murder may be that Valley of Fear of whichwe have heard. So much is fairly clear. And now, Mr. Barker, I seemto be standing rather in the way of your explanation."
It was a sight to see Cecil Barker's expressive face during thisexposition of the great detective. Anger, amazement, consternation,and indecision swept over it in turn. Finally he took refuge in asomewhat acrid irony.
"You know such a lot, Mr. Holmes, perhaps you had better tell us somemore," he sneered.
"I have no doubt that I could tell you a great deal more, Mr. Barker;but it would come with a better grace from you."
"Oh, you think so, do you? Well, all I can say is that if there's anysecret here it is not my secret, and I am not the man to give itaway."
"Well, if you take that line, Mr. Barker," said the inspectorquietly, "we must just keep you in sight until we have the warrantand can hold you."
"You can do what you damn please about that," said Barker defiantly.
The proceedings seemed to have come to a definite end so far as hewas concerned; for one had only to look at that granite face torealize that no peine forte et dure would ever force him to pleadagainst his will. The deadlock was broken, however, by a woman'svoice. Mrs. Douglas had been standing listening at the half openeddoor, and now she entered the room.
"You have done enough for now, Cecil," said she. "Whatever comes ofit in the future, you have done enough."
"Enough and more than enough," remarked Sherlock Holmes gravely. "Ihave every sympathy with you, madam, and should strongly urge you tohave some confidence in the common sense of our jurisdiction and totake the police voluntarily into your complete confidence. It may bethat I am myself at fault for not following up the hint which youconveyed to me through my friend, Dr. Watson; but, at that time I hadevery reason to believe that you were directly concerned in thecrime. Now I am assured that this is not so. At the same time, thereis much that is unexplained, and I should strongly recommend that youask Mr. Douglas to tell us his own story."
Mrs. Douglas gave a cry of astonishment at Holmes's words. Thedetectives and I must have echoed it, when we were aware of a man whoseemed to have emerged from the wall, who advanced now from the gloomof the corner in which he had appeared. Mrs. Douglas turned, and inan instant her arms were round him. Barker had seized hisoutstretched hand.
"It's best this way, Jack," his wife repeated; "I am sure that it isbest."
"Indeed, yes, Mr. Douglas," said Sherlock Holmes, "I am sure that youwill find it best."
The man stood blinking at us with the dazed look of one who comesfrom the dark into the light. It was a remarkable face, bold grayeyes, a strong, short-clipped, grizzled moustache, a square,projecting chin, and a humorous mouth. He took a good look at us all,and then to my amazement he advanced to me and handed me a bundle ofpaper.
"I've heard of you," said he in a voice which was not quite Englishand not quite American, but was altogether mellow and pleasing. "Youare the historian of this bunch. Well, Dr. Watson, you've never hadsuch a story as that pass through your hands before, and I'll lay mylast dollar on that. Tell it your own way; but there are the facts,and you can't miss the public so long as you have those. I've beencooped up two days, and I've spent the daylight hours--as muchdaylight as I could get in that rat trap--in putting the thing intowords. You're welcome to them--you and your public. There's the storyof the Valley of Fear."
"That's the past, Mr. Douglas," said Sherlock Holmes quietly. "Whatwe desire now is to hear your story of the present."
"You'll have it, sir," said Douglas. "May I smoke as I talk? Well,thank you, Mr. Holmes. You're a smoker yourself, if I remember right,and you'll guess what it is to be sitting for two days with tobaccoin your pocket and afraid that the smell will give you away." Heleaned against the mantelpiece and sucked at the cigar which Holmeshad handed him. "I've heard of you, Mr. Holmes. I never guessed thatI should meet you. But before you are through with that," he noddedat my papers, "you will say I've brought you something fresh."
Inspector MacDonald had been staring at the newcomer with thegreatest amazement. "Well, this fairly beats me!" he cried at last."If you are Mr. John Douglas of Birlstone Manor, then whose deathhave we been investigating for these two days, and where in the worldhave you sprung from now? You seemed to me to come out of the floorlike a jack-in-a-box."
"Ah, Mr. Mac," said Holmes, shaking a reproving forefinger, "youwould not read that excellent local compilation which described theconcealment of King Charles. People did not hide in those dayswithout excellent hiding places, and the hiding place that has oncebeen used may be again. I had persuaded myself that we should findMr. Douglas under this roof."
"And how long have you been playing this trick upon us, Mr. Holmes?"said the inspector angrily. "How long have you allowed us to wasteourselves upon a search that you knew to be an absurd one?"
"Not one instant, my dear Mr. Mac. Only last night did I form myviews of the case. As they could not be put to the proof until thisevening, I invited you and your colleague to take a holiday for theday. Pray what more could I do? When I found the suit of clothes inthe moat, it at once became apparent to me that the body we had foundcould not have been the body of Mr. John Douglas at all, but must bethat of the bicyclist from Tunbridge Wells. No other conclusion waspossible. Therefore I had to determine where Mr. John Douglas himselfcould be, and the balance of probability was that with the connivanceof his wife and his friend he was concealed in a house which had suchconveniences for a fugitive, and awaiting quieter times when he couldmake his final escape."
"Well, you figured it out about right," said Douglas approvingly. "Ithought I'd dodge your British law; for I was not sure how I stoodunder it, and also I saw my chance to throw these hounds once for alloff my track. Mind you, from first to last I have done nothing to beashamed of, and nothing that I would not do again; but you'll judgethat for yourselves when I tell you my story. Never mind warning me,Inspector: I'm ready to stand pat upon the truth.
"I'm not going to begin at the beginning. That's all there," heindicated my bundle of papers, "and a mighty queer yarn you'll findit. It all comes down to this: That there are some men that have goodcause to hate me and would give their last dollar to know that theyhad got me. So long as I am alive and they are alive, there is nosafety in this world for me. They hunted me from Chicago toCalifornia, then they chased me out of America; but when I marriedand settled down in this quiet spot I thought my last years weregoing to be peaceable.
"I never explained to my wife how things were. Why should I pull herinto it? She would never have a quiet moment again; but would alwaysbe imagining trouble. I fancy she knew something, for I may havedropped a word here or a word there; but until yesterday, after yougentlemen had seen her, she never knew the rights of the matter. Shetold you all she knew, and so did Barker here; for on the night whenthis thing happened there was mighty little time for explanations.She knows everything now, and I would have been a wiser man if I hadtold her sooner. But it was a hard question, dear," he took her handfor an instant in his own, "and I acted for the best.
"Well, gentlemen, the day before these happenings I was over inTunbridge Wells, and I got a glimpse of a man in the street. It wasonly a glimpse; but I have a quick eye for these things, and I neverdoubted who it was. It was the worst enemy I had among them all--onewho has been after me like a hungry wolf after a caribou all theseyears. I knew there was trouble coming, and I came home and madeready for it. I guessed I'd fight through it all right on my own, myluck was a proverb in the States about '76. I never doubted that itwould be with me still.
"I was on my guard all that next day, and never went out into thepark. It's as well, or he'd have had the drop on me with thatbuckshot gun of his before ever I could draw on him. After the bridgewas up--my mind was always more restful when that bridge was up inthe evenings--I put the thing clear out of my head. I never dreamedof his getting into the house and waiting for me. But when I made myround in my dressing gown, as was my habit, I had no sooner enteredthe study than I scented danger. I guess when a man has had dangersin his life--and I've had more than most in my time--there is a kindof sixth sense that waves the red flag. I saw the signal clearenough, and yet I couldn't tell you why. Next instant I spotted aboot under the window curtain, and then I saw why plain enough.
"I'd just the one candle that was in my hand; but there was a goodlight from the hall lamp through the open door. I put down the candleand jumped for a hammer that I'd left on the mantel. At the samemoment he sprang at me. I saw the glint of a knife, and I lashed athim with the hammer. I got him somewhere; for the knife tinkled downon the floor. He dodged round the table as quick as an eel, and amoment later he'd got his gun from under his coat. I heard him cockit; but I had got hold of it before he could fire. I had it by thebarrel, and we wrestled for it all ends up for a minute or more. Itwas death to the man that lost his grip.
"He never lost his grip; but he got it butt downward for a moment toolong. Maybe it was I that pulled the trigger. Maybe we just jolted itoff between us. Anyhow, he got both barrels in the face, and there Iwas, staring down at all that was left of Ted Baldwin. I'd recognizedhim in the township, and again when he sprang for me; but his ownmother wouldn't recognize him as I saw him then. I'm used to roughwork; but I fairly turned sick at the sight of him.
"I was hanging on the side of the table when Barker came hurryingdown. I heard my wife coming, and I ran to the door and stopped her.It was no sight for a woman. I promised I'd come to her soon. I saida word or two to Barker--he took it all in at a glance--and we waitedfor the rest to come along. But there was no sign of them. Then weunderstood that they could hear nothing, and that all that hadhappened was known only to ourselves.
"It was at that instant that the idea came to me. I was fairlydazzled by the brilliance of it. The man's sleeve had slipped up andthere was the branded mark of the lodge upon his forearm. See here!"
The man whom we had known as Douglas turned up his own coat and cuffto show a brown triangle within a circle exactly like that which wehad seen upon the dead man.
"It was the sight of that which started me on it. I seemed to see itall clear at a glance. There were his height and hair and figure,about the same as my own. No one could swear to his face, poor devil!I brought down this suit of clothes, and in a quarter of an hourBarker and I had put my dressing gown on him and he lay as you foundhim. We tied all his things into a bundle, and I weighted them withthe only weight I could find and put them through the window. Thecard he had meant to lay upon my body was lying beside his own.
"My rings were put on his finger; but when it came to the weddingring," he held out his muscular hand, "you can see for yourselvesthat I had struck the limit. I have not moved it since the day I wasmarried, and it would have taken a file to get it off. I don't know,anyhow, that I should have cared to part with it; but if I had wantedto I couldn't. So we just had to leave that detail to take care ofitself. On the other hand, I brought a bit of plaster down and put itwhere I am wearing one myself at this instant. You slipped up there,Mr. Holmes, clever as you are; for if you had chanced to take offthat plaster you would have found no cut underneath it.
"Well, that was the situation. If I could lie low for a while andthen get away where I could be joined by my 'widow' we should have achance at last of living in peace for the rest of our lives. Thesedevils would give me no rest so long as I was above ground; but ifthey saw in the papers that Baldwin had got his man, there would bean end of all my troubles. I hadn't much time to make it all clear toBarker and to my wife; but they understood enough to be able to helpme. I knew all about this hiding place, so did Ames; but it neverentered his head to connect it with the matter. I retired into it,and it was up to Barker to do the rest.
"I guess you can fill in for yourselves what he did. He opened thewindow and made the mark on the sill to give an idea of how themurderer escaped. It was a tall order, that; but as the bridge was upthere was no other way. Then, when everything was fixed, he rang thebell for all he was worth. What happened afterward you know. And so,gentlemen, you can do what you please; but I've told you the truthand the whole truth, so help me God! What I ask you now is how do Istand by the English law?"
There was a silence which was broken by Sherlock Holmes.
"The English law is in the main a just law. You will get no worsethan your deserts from that, Mr. Douglas. But I would ask you how didthis man know that you lived here, or how to get into your house, orwhere to hide to get you?"
"I know nothing of this."
Holmes's face was very white and grave. "The story is not over yet, Ifear," said he. "You may find worse dangers than the English law, oreven than your enemies from America. I see trouble before you, Mr.Douglas. You'll take my advice and still be on your guard."
And now, my long-suffering readers, I will ask you to come away withme for a time, far from the Sussex Manor House of Birlstone, and faralso from the year of grace in which we made our eventful journeywhich ended with the strange story of the man who had been known asJohn Douglas. I wish you to journey back some twenty years in time,and westward some thousands of miles in space, that I may lay beforeyou a singular and terrible narrative--so singular and so terriblethat you may find it hard to believe that even as I tell it, even sodid it occur.
Do not think that I intrude one story before another is finished. Asyou read on you will find that this is not so. And when I havedetailed those distant events and you have solved this mystery of thepast, we shall meet once more in those rooms on Baker Street, wherethis, like so many other wonderful happenings, will find its end.








                                 PART II
                             The Scowrers




     CHAPTER I     The Man

It was the fourth of February in the year 1875. It had been a severewinter, and the snow lay deep in the gorges of the GilmertonMountains. The steam ploughs had, however, kept the railroad open,and the evening train which connects the long line of coal-mining andiron-working settlements was slowly groaning its way up the steepgradients which lead from Stagville on the plain to Vermissa, thecentral township which lies at the head of Vermissa Valley. From thispoint the track sweeps downward to Bartons Crossing, Helmdale, andthe purely agricultural county of Merton. It was a single-trackrailroad; but at every siding--and they were numerous--long lines oftrucks piled with coal and iron ore told of the hidden wealth whichhad brought a rude population and a bustling life to this mostdesolate corner of the United States of America.
For desolate it was! Little could the first pioneer who had traversedit have ever imagined that the fairest prairies and the most lushwater pastures were valueless compared to this gloomy land of blackcrag and tangled forest. Above the dark and often scarcely penetrablewoods upon their flanks, the high, bare crowns of the mountains,white snow, and jagged rock towered upon each flank, leaving a long,winding, tortuous valley in the centre. Up this the little train wasslowly crawling.
The oil lamps had just been lit in the leading passenger car, a long,bare carriage in which some twenty or thirty people were seated. Thegreater number of these were workmen returning from their day's toilin the lower part of the valley. At least a dozen, by their grimedfaces and the safety lanterns which they carried, proclaimedthemselves miners. These sat smoking in a group and conversed in lowvoices, glancing occasionally at two men on the opposite side of thecar, whose uniforms and badges showed them to be policemen.
Several women of the labouring class and one or two travellers whomight have been small local storekeepers made up the rest of thecompany, with the exception of one young man in a corner by himself.It is with this man that we are concerned. Take a good look at him,for he is worth it.
He is a fresh-complexioned, middle-sized young man, not far, onewould guess, from his thirtieth year. He has large, shrewd, humorousgray eyes which twinkle inquiringly from time to time as he looksround through his spectacles at the people about him. It is easy tosee that he is of a sociable and possibly simple disposition, anxiousto be friendly to all men. Anyone could pick him at once asgregarious in his habits and communicative in his nature, with aquick wit and a ready smile. And yet the man who studied him moreclosely might discern a certain firmness of jaw and grim tightnessabout the lips which would warn him that there were depths beyond,and that this pleasant, brown-haired young Irishman might conceivablyleave his mark for good or evil upon any society to which he wasintroduced.
Having made one or two tentative remarks to the nearest miner, andreceiving only short, gruff replies, the traveller resigned himselfto uncongenial silence, staring moodily out of the window at thefading landscape.
It was not a cheering prospect. Through the growing gloom therepulsed the red glow of the furnaces on the sides of the hills. Greatheaps of slag and dumps of cinders loomed up on each side, with thehigh shafts of the collieries towering above them. Huddled groups ofmean, wooden houses, the windows of which were beginning to outlinethemselves in light, were scattered here and there along the line,and the frequent halting places were crowded with their swarthyinhabitants.
The iron and coal valleys of the Vermissa district were no resortsfor the leisured or the cultured. Everywhere there were stern signsof the crudest battle of life, the rude work to be done, and therude, strong workers who did it.
The young traveller gazed out into this dismal country with a face ofmingled repulsion and interest, which showed that the scene was newto him. At intervals he drew from his pocket a bulky letter to whichhe referred, and on the margins of which he scribbled some notes.Once from the back of his waist he produced something which one wouldhardly have expected to find in the possession of so mild-mannered aman. It was a navy revolver of the largest size. As he turned itslantwise to the light, the glint upon the rims of the copper shellswithin the drum showed that it was fully loaded. He quickly restoredit to his secret pocket, but not before it had been observed by aworking man who had seated himself upon the adjoining bench.
"Hullo, mate!" said he. "You seem heeled and ready."
The young man smiled with an air of embarrassment.
"Yes," said he, "we need them sometimes in the place I come from."
"And where may that be?"
"I'm last from Chicago."
"A stranger in these parts?"
"Yes."
"You may find you need it here," said the workman.
"Ah! is that so?" The young man seemed interested.
"Have you heard nothing of doings hereabouts?"
"Nothing out of the way."
"Why, I thought the country was full of it. You'll hear quick enough.What made you come here?"
"I heard there was always work for a willing man."
"Are you a member of the union?"
"Sure."
"Then you'll get your job, I guess. Have you any friends?"
"Not yet; but I have the means of making them."
"How's that, then?"
"I am one of the Eminent Order of Freemen. There's no town without alodge, and where there is a lodge I'll find my friends."
The remark had a singular effect upon his companion. He glanced roundsuspiciously at the others in the car. The miners were stillwhispering among themselves. The two police officers were dozing. Hecame across, seated himself close to the young traveller, and heldout his hand.
"Put it there," he said.
A hand-grip passed between the two.
"I see you speak the truth," said the workman. "But it's well to makecertain." He raised his right hand to his right eyebrow. Thetraveller at once raised his left hand to his left eyebrow.
"Dark nights are unpleasant," said the workman.
"Yes, for strangers to travel," the other answered.
"That's good enough. I'm Brother Scanlan, Lodge 341, Vermissa Valley.Glad to see you in these parts."
"Thank you. I'm Brother John McMurdo, Lodge 29, Chicago. BodymasterJ. H. Scott. But I am in luck to meet a brother so early."
"Well, there are plenty of us about. You won't find the order moreflourishing anywhere in the States than right here in VermissaValley. But we could do with some lads like you. I can't understand aspry man of the union finding no work to do in Chicago."
"I found plenty of work to do," said McMurdo.
"Then why did you leave?"
McMurdo nodded towards the policemen and smiled. "I guess those chapswould be glad to know," he said.
Scanlan groaned sympathetically. "In trouble?" he asked in a whisper.
"Deep."
"A penitentiary job?"
"And the rest."
"Not a killing!"
"It's early days to talk of such things," said McMurdo with the airof a man who had been surprised into saying more than he intended."I've my own good reasons for leaving Chicago, and let that be enoughfor you. Who are you that you should take it on yourself to ask suchthings?" His gray eyes gleamed with sudden and dangerous anger frombehind his glasses.
"All right, mate, no offense meant. The boys will think none theworse of you, whatever you may have done. Where are you bound fornow?"
"Vermissa."
"That's the third halt down the line. Where are you staying?"
McMurdo took out an envelope and held it close to the murky oil lamp."Here is the address--Jacob Shafter, Sheridan Street. It's a boardinghouse that was recommended by a man I knew in Chicago."
"Well, I don't know it; but Vermissa is out of my beat. I live atHobson's Patch, and that's here where we are drawing up. But, say,there's one bit of advice I'll give you before we part: If you're introuble in Vermissa, go straight to the Union House and see BossMcGinty. He is the Bodymaster of Vermissa Lodge, and nothing canhappen in these parts unless Black Jack McGinty wants it. So long,mate! Maybe we'll meet in lodge one of these evenings. But mind mywords: If you are in trouble, go to Boss McGinty."
Scanlan descended, and McMurdo was left once again to his thoughts.Night had now fallen, and the flames of the frequent furnaces wereroaring and leaping in the darkness. Against their lurid backgrounddark figures were bending and straining, twisting and turning, withthe motion of winch or of windlass, to the rhythm of an eternal clankand roar.
"I guess hell must look something like that," said a voice.
McMurdo turned and saw that one of the policemen had shifted in hisseat and was staring out into the fiery waste.
"For that matter," said the other policeman, "I allow that hell mustbe something like that. If there are worse devils down yonder thansome we could name, it's more than I'd expect. I guess you are new tothis part, young man?"
"Well, what if I am?" McMurdo answered in a surly voice.
"Just this, mister, that I should advise you to be careful inchoosing your friends. I don't think I'd begin with Mike Scanlan orhis gang if I were you."
"What the hell is it to you who are my friends?" roared McMurdo in avoice which brought every head in the carriage round to witness thealtercation. "Did I ask you for your advice, or did you think me sucha sucker that I couldn't move without it? You speak when you arespoken to, and by the Lord you'd have to wait a long time if it wasme!" He thrust out his face and grinned at the patrolmen like asnarling dog.
The two policemen, heavy, good-natured men, were taken aback by theextraordinary vehemence with which their friendly advances had beenrejected.
"No offense, stranger," said one. "It was a warning for your owngood, seeing that you are, by your own showing, new to the place."
"I'm new to the place; but I'm not new to you and your kind!" criedMcMurdo in cold fury. "I guess you're the same in all places, shovingyour advice in when nobody asks for it."
"Maybe we'll see more of you before very long," said one of thepatrolmen with a grin. "You're a real hand-picked one, if I am ajudge."
"I was thinking the same," remarked the other. "I guess we may meetagain."
"I'm not afraid of you, and don't you think it!" cried McMurdo. "Myname's Jack McMurdo--see? If you want me, you'll find me at JacobShafter's on Sheridan Street, Vermissa; so I'm not hiding from you,am I? Day or night I dare to look the like of you in the face--don'tmake any mistake about that!"
There was a murmur of sympathy and admiration from the miners at thedauntless demeanour of the newcomer, while the two policemen shruggedtheir shoulders and renewed a conversation between themselves.
A few minutes later the train ran into the ill-lit station, and therewas a general clearing; for Vermissa was by far the largest town onthe line. McMurdo picked up his leather gripsack and was about tostart off into the darkness, when one of the miners accosted him.
"By Gar, mate! you know how to speak to the cops," he said in a voiceof awe. "It was grand to hear you. Let me carry your grip and showyou the road. I'm passing Shafter's on the way to my own shack."
There was a chorus of friendly "Good-nights" from the other miners asthey passed from the platform. Before ever he had set foot in it,McMurdo the turbulent had become a character in Vermissa.
The country had been a place of terror; but the town was in its wayeven more depressing. Down that long valley there was at least acertain gloomy grandeur in the huge fires and the clouds of driftingsmoke, while the strength and industry of man found fitting monumentsin the hills which he had spilled by the side of his monstrousexcavations. But the town showed a dead level of mean ugliness andsqualor. The broad street was churned up by the traffic into ahorrible rutted paste of muddy snow. The sidewalks were narrow anduneven. The numerous gas-lamps served only to show more clearly along line of wooden houses, each with its veranda facing the street,unkempt and dirty.
As they approached the centre of the town the scene was brightened bya row of well-lit stores, and even more by a cluster of saloons andgaming houses, in which the miners spent their hard-earned butgenerous wages.
"That's the Union House," said the guide, pointing to one saloonwhich rose almost to the dignity of being a hotel. "Jack McGinty isthe boss there."
"What sort of a man is he?" McMurdo asked.
"What! have you never heard of the boss?"
"How could I have heard of him when you know that I am a stranger inthese parts?"
"Well, I thought his name was known clear across the country. It'sbeen in the papers often enough."
"What for?"
"Well," the miner lowered his voice--"over the affairs."
"What affairs?"
"Good Lord, mister! you are queer, if I must say it without offense.There's only one set of affairs that you'll hear of in these parts,and that's the affairs of the Scowrers."
"Why, I seem to have read of the Scowrers in Chicago. A gang ofmurderers, are they not?"
"Hush, on your life!" cried the miner, standing still in alarm, andgazing in amazement at his companion. "Man, you won't live long inthese parts if you speak in the open street like that. Many a man hashad the life beaten out of him for less."
"Well, I know nothing about them. It's only what I have read."
"And I'm not saying that you have not read the truth." The man lookednervously round him as he spoke, peering into the shadows as if hefeared to see some lurking danger. "If killing is murder, then Godknows there is murder and to spare. But don't you dare to breathe thename of Jack McGinty in connection with it, stranger; for everywhisper goes back to him, and he is not one that is likely to let itpass. Now, that's the house you're after, that one standing back fromthe street. You'll find old Jacob Shafter that runs it as honest aman as lives in this township."
"I thank you," said McMurdo, and shaking hands with his newacquaintance he plodded, gripsack in hand, up the path which led tothe dwelling house, at the door of which he gave a resounding knock.
It was opened at once by someone very different from what he hadexpected. It was a woman, young and singularly beautiful. She was ofthe German type, blonde and fair-haired, with the piquant contrast ofa pair of beautiful dark eyes with which she surveyed the strangerwith surprise and a pleasing embarrassment which brought a wave ofcolour over her pale face. Framed in the bright light of the opendoorway, it seemed to McMurdo that he had never seen a more beautifulpicture; the more attractive for its contrast with the sordid andgloomy surroundings. A lovely violet growing upon one of those blackslag-heaps of the mines would not have seemed more surprising. Soentranced was he that he stood staring without a word, and it was shewho broke the silence.
"I thought it was father," said she with a pleasing little touch of aGerman accent. "Did you come to see him? He is downtown. I expect himback every minute."
McMurdo continued to gaze at her in open admiration until her eyesdropped in confusion before this masterful visitor.
"No, miss," he said at last, "I'm in no hurry to see him. But yourhouse was recommended to me for board. I thought it might suitme--and now I know it will."
"You are quick to make up your mind," said she with a smile.
"Anyone but a blind man could do as much," the other answered.
She laughed at the compliment. "Come right in, sir," she said. "I'mMiss Ettie Shafter, Mr. Shafter's daughter. My mother's dead, and Irun the house. You can sit down by the stove in the front room untilfather comes along--Ah, here he is! So you can fix things with himright away."
A heavy, elderly man came plodding up the path. In a few wordsMcMurdo explained his business. A man of the name of Murphy had givenhim the address in Chicago. He in turn had had it from someone else.Old Shafter was quite ready. The stranger made no bones about terms,agreed at once to every condition, and was apparently fairly flush ofmoney. For seven dollars a week paid in advance he was to have boardand lodging.
So it was that McMurdo, the self-confessed fugitive from justice,took up his abode under the roof of the Shafters, the first stepwhich was to lead to so long and dark a train of events, ending in afar distant land.




     CHAPTER II     The Bodymaster

McMurdo was a man who made his mark quickly. Wherever he was the folkaround soon knew it. Within a week he had become infinitely the mostimportant person at Shafter's. There were ten or a dozen boardersthere; but they were honest foremen or commonplace clerks from thestores, of a very different calibre from the young Irishman. Of anevening when they gathered together his joke was always the readiest,his conversation the brightest, and his song the best. He was a bornboon companion, with a magnetism which drew good humour from allaround him.
And yet he showed again and again, as he had shown in the railwaycarriage, a capacity for sudden, fierce anger, which compelled therespect and even the fear of those who met him. For the law, too, andall who were connected with it, he exhibited a bitter contempt whichdelighted some and alarmed others of his fellow boarders.
From the first he made it evident, by his open admiration, that thedaughter of the house had won his heart from the instant that he hadset eyes upon her beauty and her grace. He was no backward suitor. Onthe second day he told her that he loved her, and from then onward herepeated the same story with an absolute disregard of what she mightsay to discourage him.
"Someone else?" he would cry. "Well, the worse luck for someone else!Let him look out for himself! Am I to lose my life's chance and allmy heart's desire for someone else? You can keep on saying no, Ettie:the day will come when you will say yes, and I'm young enough towait."
He was a dangerous suitor, with his glib Irish tongue, and hispretty, coaxing ways. There was about him also that glamour ofexperience and of mystery which attracts a woman's interest, andfinally her love. He could talk of the sweet valleys of CountyMonaghan from which he came, of the lovely, distant island, the lowhills and green meadows of which seemed the more beautiful whenimagination viewed them from this place of grime and snow.
Then he was versed in the life of the cities of the North, ofDetroit, and the lumber camps of Michigan, and finally of Chicago,where he had worked in a planing mill. And afterwards came the hintof romance, the feeling that strange things had happened to him inthat great city, so strange and so intimate that they might not bespoken of. He spoke wistfully of a sudden leaving, a breaking of oldties, a flight into a strange world, ending in this dreary valley,and Ettie listened, her dark eyes gleaming with pity and withsympathy--those two qualities which may turn so rapidly and sonaturally to love.
McMurdo had obtained a temporary job as bookkeeper; for he was awell-educated man. This kept him out most of the day, and he had notfound occasion yet to report himself to the head of the lodge of theEminent Order of Freemen. He was reminded of his omission, however,by a visit one evening from Mike Scanlan, the fellow member whom hehad met in the train. Scanlan, the small, sharp-faced, nervous,black-eyed man, seemed glad to see him once more. After a glass ortwo of whisky he broached the object of his visit.
"Say, McMurdo," said he, "I remembered your address, so l made boldto call. I'm surprised that you've not reported to the Bodymaster.Why haven't you seen Boss McGinty yet?"
"Well, I had to find a job. I have been busy."
"You must find time for him if you have none for anything else. GoodLord, man! you're a fool not to have been down to the Union House andregistered your name the first morning after you came here! If yourun against him--well, you mustn't, that's all!"
McMurdo showed mild surprise. "I've been a member of the lodge forover two years, Scanlan, but I never heard that duties were sopressing as all that."
"Maybe not in Chicago."
"Well, it's the same society here."
"Is it?"
Scanlan looked at him long and fixedly. There was something sinisterin his eyes.
"Isn't it?"
"You'll tell me that in a month's time. I hear you had a talk withthe patrolmen after I left the train."
"How did you know that?"
"Oh, it got about--things do get about for good and for bad in thisdistrict."
"Well, yes. I told the hounds what I thought of them."
"By the Lord, you'll be a man after McGinty's heart!"
"What, does he hate the police too?"
Scanlan burst out laughing. "You go and see him, my lad," said he ashe took his leave. "It's not the police but you that he'll hate ifyou don't! Now, take a friend's advice and go at once!"
It chanced that on the same evening McMurdo had another more pressinginterview which urged him in the same direction. It may have beenthat his attentions to Ettie had been more evident than before, orthat they had gradually obtruded themselves into the slow mind of hisgood German host; but, whatever the cause, the boarding-house keeperbeckoned the young man into his private room and started on thesubject without any circumlocution.
"It seems to me, mister," said he, "that you are gettin' set on myEttie. Ain't that so, or am I wrong?"
"Yes, that is so," the young man answered.
"Vell, I vant to tell you right now that it ain't no manner of use.There's someone slipped in afore you."
"She told me so."
"Vell, you can lay that she told you truth. But did she tell you whoit vas?"
"No, I asked her; but she wouldn't tell."
"I dare say not, the leetle baggage! Perhaps she did not vish tofrighten you avay."
"Frighten!" McMurdo was on fire in a moment.
"Ah, yes, my friend! You need not be ashamed to be frightened of him.It is Teddy Baldwin."
"And who the devil is he?"
"He is a boss of Scowrers."
"Scowrers! I've heard of them before. It's Scowrers here and Scowrersthere, and always in a whisper! What are you all afraid of? Who arethe Scowrers?"
The boarding-house keeper instinctively sank his voice, as everyonedid who talked about that terrible society. "The Scowrers," said he,"are the Eminent Order of Freemen!"
The young man stared. "Why, I am a member of that order myself."
"You! I vould never have had you in my house if I had known it--notif you vere to pay me a hundred dollar a week."
"What's wrong with the order? It's for charity and good fellowship.The rules say so."
"Maybe in some places. Not here!"
"What is it here?"
"It's a murder society, that's vat it is."
McMurdo laughed incredulously. "How can you prove that?" he asked.
"Prove it! Are there not fifty murders to prove it? Vat about Milmanand Van Shorst, and the Nicholson family, and old Mr. Hyam, andlittle Billy James, and the others? Prove it! Is there a man or avoman in this valley vat does not know it?"
"See here!" said McMurdo earnestly. "I want you to take back whatyou've said, or else make it good. One or the other you must dobefore I quit this room. Put yourself in my place. Here am I, astranger in the town. I belong to a society that I know only as aninnocent one. You'll find it through the length and breadth of theStates, but always as an innocent one. Now, when I am counting uponjoining it here, you tell me that it is the same as a murder societycalled the Scowrers. I guess you owe me either an apology or else anexplanation, Mr. Shafter."
"I can but tell you vat the whole vorld knows, mister. The bosses ofthe one are the bosses of the other. If you offend the one, it is theother vat vill strike you. We have proved it too often."
"That's just gossip--I want proof!" said McMurdo.
"If you live here long you vill get your proof. But I forget that youare yourself one of them. You vill soon be as bad as the rest. Butyou vill find other lodgings, mister. I cannot have you here. Is itnot bad enough that one of these people come courting my Ettie, andthat I dare not turn him down, but that I should have another for myboarder? Yes, indeed, you shall not sleep here after to-night!"
McMurdo found himself under sentence of banishment both from hiscomfortable quarters and from the girl whom he loved. He found heralone in the sitting-room that same evening, and he poured histroubles into her ear.
"Sure, your father is after giving me notice," he said. "It's littleI would care if it was just my room, but indeed, Ettie, though it'sonly a week that I've known you, you are the very breath of life tome, and I can't live without you!"
"Oh, hush, Mr. McMurdo, don't speak so!" said the girl. "I have toldyou, have I not, that you are too late? There is another, and if Ihave not promised to marry him at once, at least I can promise no oneelse."
"Suppose I had been first, Ettie, would I have had a chance?"
The girl sank her face into her hands. "I wish to heaven that you hadbeen first!" she sobbed.
McMurdo was down on his knees before her in an instant. "For God'ssake, Ettie, let it stand at that!" he cried. "Will you ruin yourlife and my own for the sake of this promise? Follow your heart,acushla! 'Tis a safer guide than any promise before you knew what itwas that you were saying."
He had seized Ettie's white hand between his own strong brown ones.
"Say that you will be mine, and we will face it out together!"
"Not here?"
"Yes, here."
"No, no, Jack!" His arms were round her now. "It could not be here.Could you take me away?"
A struggle passed for a moment over McMurdo's face; but it ended bysetting like granite. "No, here," he said. "I'll hold you against theworld, Ettie, right here where we are!"
"Why should we not leave together?"
"No, Ettie, I can't leave here."
"But why?"
"I'd never hold my head up again if I felt that I had been drivenout. Besides, what is there to be afraid of? Are we not free folks ina free country? If you love me, and I you, who will dare to comebetween?"
"You don't know, Jack. You've been here too short a time. You don'tknow this Baldwin. You don't know McGinty and his Scowrers."
"No, I don't know them, and I don't fear them, and I don't believe inthem!" said McMurdo. "I've lived among rough men, my darling, andinstead of fearing them it has always ended that they have fearedme--always, Ettie. It's mad on the face of it! If these men, as yourfather says, have done crime after crime in the valley, and ifeveryone knows them by name, how comes it that none are brought tojustice? You answer me that, Ettie!"
"Because no witness dares to appear against them. He would not live amonth if he did. Also because they have always their own men to swearthat the accused one was far from the scene of the crime. But surely,Jack, you must have read all this. I had understood that every paperin the United States was writing about it."
"Well, I have read something, it is true; but I had thought it was astory. Maybe these men have some reason in what they do. Maybe theyare wronged and have no other way to help themselves."
"Oh, Jack, don't let me hear you speak so! That is how he speaks--theother one!"
"Baldwin--he speaks like that, does he?"
"And that is why I loathe him so. Oh, Jack, now I can tell you thetruth. I loathe him with all my heart; but I fear him also. I fearhim for myself; but above all I fear him for father. I know that somegreat sorrow would come upon us if I dared to say what I really felt.That is why I have put him off with half-promises. It was in realtruth our only hope. But if you would fly with me, Jack, we couldtake father with us and live forever far from the power of thesewicked men."
Again there was the struggle upon McMurdo's face, and again it setlike granite. "No harm shall come to you, Ettie--nor to your fathereither. As to wicked men, I expect you may find that I am as bad asthe worst of them before we're through."
"No, no, Jack! I would trust you anywhere."
McMurdo laughed bitterly. "Good Lord! how little you know of me! Yourinnocent soul, my darling, could not even guess what is passing inmine. But, hullo, who's the visitor?"
The door had opened suddenly, and a young fellow came swaggering inwith the air of one who is the master. He was a handsome, dashingyoung man of about the same age and build as McMurdo himself. Underhis broad-brimmed black felt hat, which he had not troubled toremove, a handsome face with fierce, domineering eyes and a curvedhawk-bill of a nose looked savagely at the pair who sat by the stove.
Ettie had jumped to her feet full of confusion and alarm. "I'm gladto see you, Mr. Baldwin," said she. "You're earlier than I hadthought. Come and sit down."
Baldwin stood with his hands on his hips looking at McMurdo. "Who isthis?" he asked curtly.
"It's a friend of mine, Mr. Baldwin, a new boarder here. Mr. McMurdo,may I introduce you to Mr. Baldwin?"
The young men nodded in surly fashion to each other.
"Maybe Miss Ettie has told you how it is with us?" said Baldwin.
"I didn't understand that there was any relation between you."
"Didn't you? Well, you can understand it now. You can take it from methat this young lady is mine, and you'll find it a very fine eveningfor a walk."
"Thank you, I am in no humour for a walk."
"Aren't you?" The man's savage eyes were blazing with anger. "Maybeyou are in a humour for a fight, Mr. Boarder!"
"That I am!" cried McMurdo, springing to his feet. "You never said amore welcome word."
"For God's sake, Jack! Oh, for God's sake!" cried poor, distractedEttie. "Oh, Jack, Jack, he will hurt you!"
"Oh, it's Jack, is it?" said Baldwin with an oath. "You've come tothat already, have you?"
"Oh, Ted, be reasonable--be kind! For my sake, Ted, if ever you lovedme, be big-hearted and forgiving!"
"I think, Ettie, that if you were to leave us alone we could get thisthing settled," said McMurdo quietly. "Or maybe, Mr. Baldwin, youwill take a turn down the street with me. It's a fine evening, andthere's some open ground beyond the next block."
"I'll get even with you without needing to dirty my hands," said hisenemy. "You'll wish you had never set foot in this house before I amthrough with you!"
"No time like the present," cried McMurdo.
"I'll choose my own time, mister. You can leave the time to me. Seehere!" He suddenly rolled up his sleeve and showed upon his forearm apeculiar sign which appeared to have been branded there. It was acircle with a triangle within it. "D'you know what that means?"
"I neither know nor care!"
"Well, you will know, I'll promise you that. You won't be much older,either. Perhaps Miss Ettie can tell you something about it. As toyou, Ettie, you'll come back to me on your knees--d'ye hear,girl?--on your knees--and then I'll tell you what your punishment maybe. You've sowed--and by the Lord, I'll see that you reap!" Heglanced at them both in fury. Then he turned upon his heel, and aninstant later the outer door had banged behind him.
For a few moments McMurdo and the girl stood in silence. Then shethrew her arms around him.
"Oh, Jack, how brave you were! But it is no use, you must fly!To-night--Jack--to-night! It's your only hope. He will have yourlife. I read it in his horrible eyes. What chance have you against adozen of them, with Boss McGinty and all the power of the lodgebehind them?"
McMurdo disengaged her hands, kissed her, and gently pushed her backinto a chair. "There, acushla, there! Don't be disturbed or fear forme. I'm a Freeman myself. I'm after telling your father about it.Maybe I am no better than the others; so don't make a saint of me.Perhaps you hate me too, now that I've told you as much?"
"Hate you, Jack? While life lasts I could never do that! I've heardthat there is no harm in being a Freeman anywhere but here; so whyshould I think the worse of you for that? But if you are a Freeman,Jack, why should you not go down and make a friend of Boss McGinty?Oh, hurry, Jack, hurry! Get your word in first, or the hounds will beon your trail."
"I was thinking the same thing," said McMurdo. "I'll go right now andfix it. You can tell your father that I'll sleep here to-night andfind some other quarters in the morning."
The bar of McGinty's saloon was crowded as usual, for it was thefavourite loafing place of all the rougher elements of the town. Theman was popular; for he had a rough, jovial disposition which formeda mask, covering a great deal which lay behind it. But apart fromthis popularity, the fear in which he was held throughout thetownship, and indeed down the whole thirty miles of the valley andpast the mountains on each side of it, was enough in itself to fillhis bar; for none could afford to neglect his good will.
Besides those secret powers which it was universally believed that heexercised in so pitiless a fashion, he was a high public official, amunicipal councillor, and a commissioner of roads, elected to theoffice through the votes of the ruffians who in turn expected toreceive favours at his hands. Assessments and taxes were enormous;the public works were notoriously neglected, the accounts wereslurred over by bribed auditors, and the decent citizen wasterrorized into paying public blackmail, and holding his tongue lestsome worse thing befall him.
Thus it was that, year by year, Boss McGinty's diamond pins becamemore obtrusive, his gold chains more weighty across a more gorgeousvest, and his saloon stretched farther and farther, until itthreatened to absorb one whole side of the Market Square.
McMurdo pushed open the swinging door of the saloon and made his wayamid the crowd of men within, through an atmosphere blurred withtobacco smoke and heavy with the smell of spirits. The place wasbrilliantly lighted, and the huge, heavily gilt mirrors upon everywall reflected and multiplied the garish illumination. There wereseveral bartenders in their shirt sleeves, hard at work mixing drinksfor the loungers who fringed the broad, brass-trimmed counter.
At the far end, with his body resting upon the bar and a cigar stuckat an acute angle from the corner of his mouth, stood a tall, strong,heavily built man who could be none other than the famous McGintyhimself. He was a black-maned giant, bearded to the cheek-bones, andwith a shock of raven hair which fell to his collar. His complexionwas as swarthy as that of an Italian, and his eyes were of a strangedead black, which, combined with a slight squint, gave them aparticularly sinister appearance.
All else in the man--his noble proportions, his fine features, andhis frank bearing--fitted in with that jovial, man-to-man mannerwhich he affected. Here, one would say, is a bluff, honest fellow,whose heart would be sound however rude his outspoken words mightseem. It was only when those dead, dark eyes, deep and remorseless,were turned upon a man that he shrank within himself, feeling that hewas face to face with an infinite possibility of latent evil, with astrength and courage and cunning behind it which made it a thousandtimes more deadly.
Having had a good look at his man, McMurdo elbowed his way forwardwith his usual careless audacity, and pushed himself through thelittle group of courtiers who were fawning upon the powerful boss,laughing uproariously at the smallest of his jokes. The youngstranger's bold gray eyes looked back fearlessly through theirglasses at the deadly black ones which turned sharply upon him.
"Well, young man, I can't call your face to mind."
"I'm new here, Mr. McGinty."
"You are not so new that you can't give a gentleman his propertitle."
"He's Councillor McGinty, young man," said a voice from the group.
"I'm sorry, Councillor. I'm strange to the ways of the place. But Iwas advised to see you."
"Well, you see me. This is all there is. What d'you think of me?"
"Well, it's early days. If your heart is as big as your body, andyour soul as fine as your face, then I'd ask for nothing better,"said McMurdo.
"By Gar! you've got an Irish tongue in your head anyhow," cried thesaloon-keeper, not quite certain whether to humour this audaciousvisitor or to stand upon his dignity.
"So you are good enough to pass my appearance?"
"Sure," said McMurdo.
"And you were told to see me?"
"I was."
"And who told you?"
"Brother Scanlan of Lodge 341, Vermissa. I drink your healthCouncillor, and to our better acquaintance." He raised a glass withwhich he had been served to his lips and elevated his little fingeras he drank it.
McGinty, who had been watching him narrowly, raised his thick blackeyebrows. "Oh, it's like that, is it?" said he. "I'll have to look abit closer into this, Mister--"
"McMurdo."
"A bit closer, Mr. McMurdo; for we don't take folk on trust in theseparts, nor believe all we're told neither. Come in here for a moment,behind the bar."
There was a small room there, lined with barrels. McGinty carefullyclosed the door, and then seated himself on one of them, bitingthoughtfully on his cigar and surveying his companion with thosedisquieting eyes. For a couple of minutes he sat in complete silence.McMurdo bore the inspection cheerfully, one hand in his coat pocket,the other twisting his brown moustache. Suddenly McGinty stooped andproduced a wicked-looking revolver.
"See here, my joker," said he, "if I thought you were playing anygame on us, it would be short work for you."
"This is a strange welcome," McMurdo answered with some dignity, "forthe Bodymaster of a lodge of Freemen to give to a stranger brother."
"Ay, but it's just that same that you have to prove," said McGinty,"and God help you if you fail! Where were you made?"
"Lodge 29, Chicago."
"When?"
"June 24, 1872."
"What Bodymaster?"
"James H. Scott."
"Who is your district ruler?"
"Bartholomew Wilson."
"Hum! You seem glib enough in your tests. What are you doing here?"
"Working, the same as you--but a poorer job."
"You have your back answer quick enough."
"Yes, I was always quick of speech."
"Are you quick of action?"
"I have had that name among those that knew me best."
"Well, we may try you sooner than you think. Have you heard anythingof the lodge in these parts?"
"I've heard that it takes a man to be a brother."
"True for you, Mr. McMurdo. Why did you leave Chicago?"
"I'm damned if I tell you that!"
McGinty opened his eyes. He was not used to being answered in suchfashion, and it amused him. "Why won't you tell me?"
"Because no brother may tell another a lie."
"Then the truth is too bad to tell?"
"You can put it that way if you like."
"See here, mister, you can't expect me, as Bodymaster, to pass intothe lodge a man for whose past he can't answer."
McMurdo looked puzzled. Then he took a worn newspaper cutting from aninner pocket.
"You wouldn't squeal on a fellow?" said he.
"I'll wipe my hand across your face if you say such words to me!"cried McGinty hotly.
"You are right, Councillor," said McMurdo meekly. "I shouldapologize. I spoke without thought. Well, I know that I am safe inyour hands. Look at that clipping."
McGinty glanced his eyes over the account of the shooting of oneJonas Pinto, in the Lake Saloon, Market Street, Chicago, in the NewYear week of 1874.
"Your work?" he asked, as he handed back the paper.
McMurdo nodded.
"Why did you shoot him?"
"I was helping Uncle Sam to make dollars. Maybe mine were not as goodgold as his, but they looked as well and were cheaper to make. Thisman Pinto helped me to shove the queer--"
"To do what?"
"Well, it means to pass the dollars out into circulation. Then hesaid he would split. Maybe he did split. I didn't wait to see. I justkilled him and lighted out for the coal country."
"Why the coal country?"
"'Cause I'd read in the papers that they weren't too particular inthose parts."
McGinty laughed. "You were first a coiner and then a murderer, andyou came to these parts because you thought you'd be welcome."
"That's about the size of it," McMurdo answered.
"Well, I guess you'll go far. Say, can you make those dollars yet?"
McMurdo took half a dozen from his pocket. "Those never passed thePhiladelphia mint," said he.
"You don't say!" McGinty held them to the light in his enormous hand,which was hairy as a gorilla's. "I can see no difference. Gar! you'llbe a mighty useful brother, I'm thinking! We can do with a bad man ortwo among us, Friend McMurdo: for there are times when we have totake our own part. We'd soon be against the wall if we didn't shoveback at those that were pushing us."
"Well, I guess I'll do my share of shoving with the rest of theboys."
"You seem to have a good nerve. You didn't squirm when I shoved thisgun at you."
"It was not me that was in danger."
"Who then?"
"It was you, Councillor." McMurdo drew a cocked pistol from the sidepocket of his peajacket. "I was covering you all the time. I guess myshot would have been as quick as yours."
"By Gar!" McGinty flushed an angry red and then burst into a roar oflaughter. "Say, we've had no such holy terror come to hand this manya year. I reckon the lodge will learn to be proud of you ... Well,what the hell do you want? And can't I speak alone with a gentlemanfor five minutes but you must butt in on us?"
The bartender stood abashed. "I'm sorry, Councillor, but it's TedBaldwin. He says he must see you this very minute."
The message was unnecessary; for the set, cruel face of the manhimself was looking over the servant's shoulder. He pushed thebartender out and closed the door on him.
"So," said he with a furious glance at McMurdo, "you got here first,did you? I've a word to say to you, Councillor, about this man."
"Then say it here and now before my face," cried McMurdo.
"I'll say it at my own time, in my own way."
"Tut! Tut!" said McGinty, getting off his barrel. "This will neverdo. We have a new brother here, Baldwin, and it's not for us to greethim in such fashion. Hold out your hand, man, and make it up!"
"Never!" cried Baldwin in a fury.
"I've offered to fight him if he thinks I have wronged him," saidMcMurdo. "I'll fight him with fists, or, if that won't satisfy him,I'll fight him any other way he chooses. Now, I'll leave it to you,Councillor, to judge between us as a Bodymaster should."
"What is it, then?"
"A young lady. She's free to choose for herself."
"Is she?" cried Baldwin.
"As between two brothers of the lodge I should say that she was,"said the Boss.
"Oh, that's your ruling, is it?"
"Yes, it is, Ted Baldwin," said McGinty, with a wicked stare. "Is ityou that would dispute it?"
"You would throw over one that has stood by you this five years infavour of a man that you never saw before in your life? You're notBodymaster for life, Jack McGinty, and by God! when next it comes toa vote--"
The Councillor sprang at him like a tiger. His hand closed round theother's neck, and he hurled him back across one of the barrels. Inhis mad fury he would have squeezed the life out of him if McMurdohad not interfered.
"Easy, Councillor! For heaven's sake, go easy!" he cried, as hedragged him back.
McGinty released his hold, and Baldwin, cowed and shaken gasping forbreath, and shivering in every limb, as one who has looked over thevery edge of death, sat up on the barrel over which he had beenhurled.
"You've been asking for it this many a day, Ted Baldwin--now you'vegot it!" cried McGinty, his huge chest rising and falling. "Maybe youthink if I was voted down from Bodymaster you would find yourself inmy shoes. It's for the lodge to say that. But so long as I am thechief I'll have no man lift his voice against me or my rulings."
"I have nothing against you," mumbled Baldwin, feeling his throat.
"Well, then," cried the other, relapsing in a moment into a bluffjoviality, "we are all good friends again and there's an end of thematter."
He took a bottle of champagne down from the shelf and twisted out thecork.
"See now," he continued, as he filled three high glasses. "Let usdrink the quarrelling toast of the lodge. After that, as you know,there can be no bad blood between us. Now, then the left hand on theapple of my throat. I say to you, Ted Baldwin, what is the offense,sir?"
"The clouds are heavy," answered Baldwin.
"But they will forever brighten."
"And this I swear!"
The men drank their glasses, and the same ceremony was performedbetween Baldwin and McMurdo
"There!" cried McGinty, rubbing his hands. "That's the end of theblack blood. You come under lodge discipline if it goes further, andthat's a heavy hand in these parts, as Brother Baldwin knows--and asyou will damn soon find out, Brother McMurdo, if you ask fortrouble!"
"Faith, I'd be slow to do that," said McMurdo. He held out his handto Baldwin. "I'm quick to quarrel and quick to forgive. It's my hotIrish blood, they tell me. But it's over for me, and I bear nogrudge."
Baldwin had to take the proffered hand, for the baleful eye of theterrible Boss was upon him. But his sullen face showed how little thewords of the other had moved him.
McGinty clapped them both on the shoulders. "Tut! These girls! Thesegirls!" he cried. "To think that the same petticoats should comebetween two of my boys! It's the devil's own luck! Well, it's thecolleen inside of them that must settle the question for it's outsidethe jurisdiction of a Bodymaster--and the Lord be praised for that!We have enough on us, without the women as well. You'll have to beaffiliated to Lodge 341, Brother McMurdo. We have our own ways andmethods, different from Chicago. Saturday night is our meeting, andif you come then, we'll make you free forever of the VermissaValley."




     CHAPTER III     Lodge 341, Vermissa

On the day following the evening which had contained so many excitingevents, McMurdo moved his lodgings from old Jacob Shafter's and tookup his quarters at the Widow MacNamara's on the extreme outskirts ofthe town. Scanlan, his original acquaintance aboard the train, hadoccasion shortly afterwards to move into Vermissa, and the two lodgedtogether. There was no other boarder, and the hostess was aneasy-going old Irishwoman who left them to themselves; so that theyhad a freedom for speech and action welcome to men who had secrets incommon.
Shafter had relented to the extent of letting McMurdo come to hismeals there when he liked; so that his intercourse with Ettie was byno means broken. On the contrary, it drew closer and more intimate asthe weeks went by.
In his bedroom at his new abode McMurdo felt it safe to take out thecoining moulds, and under many a pledge of secrecy a number ofbrothers from the lodge were allowed to come in and see them, eachcarrying away in his pocket some examples of the false money, socunningly struck that there was never the slightest difficulty ordanger in passing it. Why, with such a wonderful art at his command,McMurdo should condescend to work at all was a perpetual mystery tohis companions; though he made it clear to anyone who asked him thatif he lived without any visible means it would very quickly bring thepolice upon his track.
One policeman was indeed after him already; but the incident, as luckwould have it, did the adventurer a great deal more good than harm.After the first introduction there were few evenings when he did notfind his way to McGinty's saloon, there to make closer acquaintancewith "the boys," which was the jovial title by which the dangerousgang who infested the place were known to one another. His dashingmanner and fearlessness of speech made him a favourite with them all;while the rapid and scientific way in which he polished off hisantagonist in an "all in" bar-room scrap earned the respect of thatrough community. Another incident, however, raised him even higher intheir estimation.
Just at the crowded hour one night, the door opened and a man enteredwith the quiet blue uniform and peaked cap of the mine police. Thiswas a special body raised by the railways and colliery owners tosupplement the efforts of the ordinary civil police, who wereperfectly helpless in the face of the organized ruffianism whichterrorized the district. There was a hush as he entered, and many acurious glance was cast at him; but the relations between policemenand criminals are peculiar in some parts of the States, and McGintyhimself standing behind his counter, showed no surprise when thepoliceman enrolled himself among his customers.
"A straight whisky, for the night is bitter," said the policeofficer. "I don't think we have met before, Councillor?"
"You'll be the new captain?" said McGinty.
"That's so. We're looking to you, Councillor, and to the otherleading citizens, to help us in upholding law and order in thistownship. Captain Marvin is my name."
"We'd do better without you, Captain Marvin," said McGinty coldly;"for we have our own police of the township, and no need for anyimported goods. What are you but the paid tool of the capitalists,hired by them to club or shoot your poorer fellow citizen?"
"Well, well, we won't argue about that," said the police officergood-humouredly. "I expect we all do our duty same as we see it; butwe can't all see it the same." He had drunk off his glass and hadturned to go, when his eyes fell upon the face of Jack McMurdo, whowas scowling at his elbow. "Hullo! Hullo!" he cried, looking him upand down. "Here's an old acquaintance!"
McMurdo shrank away from him. "I was never a friend to you nor anyother cursed copper in my life," said he.
"An acquaintance isn't always a friend," said the police captain,grinning. "You're Jack McMurdo of Chicago, right enough, and don'tyou deny it!"
McMurdo shrugged his shoulders. "I'm not denying it," said he. "D'yethink I'm ashamed of my own name?"
"You've got good cause to be, anyhow."
"What the devil d'you mean by that?" he roared with his fistsclenched.
"No, no, Jack, bluster won't do with me. I was an officer in Chicagobefore ever I came to this darned coal bunker, and I know a Chicagocrook when I see one."
McMurdo's face fell. "Don't tell me that you're Marvin of the ChicagoCentral!" he cried.
"Just the same old Teddy Marvin, at your service. We haven'tforgotten the shooting of Jonas Pinto up there."
"I never shot him."
"Did you not? That's good impartial evidence, ain't it? Well, hisdeath came in uncommon handy for you, or they would have had you forshoving the queer. Well, we can let that be bygones; for, between youand me--and perhaps I'm going further than my duty in saying it--theycould get no clear case against you, and Chicago's open to youto-morrow."
"I'm very well where I am."
"Well, I've given you the pointer, and you're a sulky dog not tothank me for it."
"Well, I suppose you mean well, and I do thank you," said McMurdo inno very gracious manner.
"It's mum with me so long as I see you living on the straight," saidthe captain. "But, by the Lord! if you get off after this, it'sanother story! So good-night to you--and goodnight, Councillor."
He left the bar-room; but not before he had created a local hero.McMurdo's deeds in far Chicago had been whispered before. He had putoff all questions with a smile, as one who did not wish to havegreatness thrust upon him. But now the thing was officiallyconfirmed. The bar loafers crowded round him and shook him heartilyby the hand. He was free of the community from that time on. He coulddrink hard and show little trace of it; but that evening, had hismate Scanlan not been at hand to lead him home, the feted hero wouldsurely have spent his night under the bar.
On a Saturday night McMurdo was introduced to the lodge. He hadthought to pass in without ceremony as being an initiate of Chicago;but there were particular rites in Vermissa of which they were proud,and these had to be undergone by every postulant. The assembly met ina large room reserved for such purposes at the Union House. Somesixty members assembled at Vermissa; but that by no means representedthe full strength of the organization, for there were several otherlodges in the valley, and others across the mountains on each side,who exchanged members when any serious business was afoot, so that acrime might be done by men who were strangers to the locality.Altogether there were not less than five hundred scattered over thecoal district.
In the bare assembly room the men were gathered round a long table.At the side was a second one laden with bottles and glasses, on whichsome members of the company were already turning their eyes. McGintysat at the head with a flat black velvet cap upon his shock oftangled black hair, and a coloured purple stole round his neck, sothat he seemed to be a priest presiding over some diabolical ritual.To right and left of him were the higher lodge officials, the cruel,handsome face of Ted Baldwin among them. Each of these wore somescarf or medallion as emblem of his office.
They were, for the most part, men of mature age; but the rest of thecompany consisted of young fellows from eighteen to twenty-five, theready and capable agents who carried out the commands of theirseniors. Among the older men were many whose features showed thetigerish, lawless souls within; but looking at the rank and file itwas difficult to believe that these eager and open-faced youngfellows were in very truth a dangerous gang of murderers, whose mindshad suffered such complete moral perversion that they took a horriblepride in their proficiency at the business, and looked with deepestrespect at the man who had the reputation of making what they called"a clean job."
To their contorted natures it had become a spirited and chivalrousthing to volunteer for service against some man who had never injuredthem, and whom in many cases they had never seen in their lives. Thecrime committed, they quarrelled as to who had actually struck thefatal blow, and amused one another and the company by describing thecries and contortions of the murdered man.
At first they had shown some secrecy in their arrangements; but atthe time which this narrative describes their proceedings wereextraordinarily open, for the repeated failures of the law had provedto them that, on the one hand, no one would dare to witness againstthem, and on the other they had an unlimited number of stanchwitnesses upon whom they could call, and a well-filled treasure chestfrom which they could draw the funds to engage the best legal talentin the state. In ten long years of outrage there had been no singleconviction, and the only danger that ever threatened the Scowrers layin the victim himself--who, however outnumbered and taken bysurprise, might and occasionally did leave his mark upon hisassailants.
McMurdo had been warned that some ordeal lay before him; but no onewould tell him in what it consisted. He was led now into an outerroom by two solemn brothers. Through the plank partition he couldhear the murmur of many voices from the assembly within. Once ortwice he caught the sound of his own name, and he knew that they werediscussing his candidacy. Then there entered an inner guard with agreen and gold sash across his chest.
"The Bodymaster orders that he shall be trussed, blinded, andentered," said he.
The three of them removed his coat, turned up the sleeve of his rightarm, and finally passed a rope round above the elbows and made itfast. They next placed a thick black cap right over his head and theupper part of his face, so that he could see nothing. He was then ledinto the assembly hall.
It was pitch dark and very oppressive under his hood. He heard therustle and murmur of the people round him, and then the voice ofMcGinty sounded dull and distant through the covering of his ears.
"John McMurdo," said the voice, "are you already a member of theAncient Order of Freemen?"
He bowed in assent.
"Is your lodge No. 29, Chicago?"
He bowed again.
"Dark nights are unpleasant," said the voice.
"Yes, for strangers to travel," he answered.
"The clouds are heavy."
"Yes, a storm is approaching."
"Are the brethren satisfied?" asked the Bodymaster.
There was a general murmur of assent.
"We know, Brother, by your sign and by your countersign that you areindeed one of us," said McGinty. "We would have you know, however,that in this county and in other counties of these parts we havecertain rites, and also certain duties of our own which call for goodmen. Are you ready to be tested?"
"I am."
"Are you of stout heart?"
"I am."
"Take a stride forward to prove it."
As the words were said he felt two hard points in front of his eyes,pressing upon them so that it appeared as if he could not moveforward without a danger of losing them. None the less, he nervedhimself to step resolutely out, and as he did so the pressure meltedaway. There was a low murmur of applause.
"He is of stout heart," said the voice. "Can you bear pain?"
"As well as another," he answered.
"Test him!"
It was all he could do to keep himself from screaming out, for anagonizing pain shot through his forearm. He nearly fainted at thesudden shock of it; but he bit his lip and clenched his hands to hidehis agony.
"I can take more than that," said he.
This time there was loud applause. A finer first appearance had neverbeen made in the lodge. Hands clapped him on the back, and the hoodwas plucked from his head. He stood blinking and smiling amid thecongratulations of the brothers.
"One last word, Brother McMurdo," said McGinty. "You have alreadysworn the oath of secrecy and fidelity, and you are aware that thepunishment for any breach of it is instant and inevitable death?"
"I am," said McMurdo.
"And you accept the rule of the Bodymaster for the time being underall circumstances?"
"I do."
"Then in the name of Lodge 341, Vermissa, I welcome you to itsprivileges and debates. You will put the liquor on the table, BrotherScanlan, and we will drink to our worthy brother."
McMurdo's coat had been brought to him; but before putting it on heexamined his right arm, which still smarted heavily. There on theflesh of the forearm was a circle with a triangle within it, deep andred, as the branding iron had left it. One or two of his neighbourspulled up their sleeves and showed their own lodge marks.
"We've all had it," said one; "but not all as brave as you over it."
"Tut! It was nothing," said he; but it burned and ached all the same.
When the drinks which followed the ceremony of initiation had allbeen disposed of, the business of the lodge proceeded. McMurdo,accustomed only to the prosaic performances of Chicago, listened withopen ears and more surprise than he ventured to show to whatfollowed.
"The first business on the agenda paper," said McGinty, "is to readthe following letter from Division Master Windle of Merton CountyLodge 249. He says:
"Dear Sir:"There is a job to be done on Andrew Rae of Rae & Sturmash, coalowners near this place. You will remember that your lodge owes us areturn, having had the service of two brethren in the matter of thepatrolman last fall. You will send two good men, they will be takencharge of by Treasurer Higgins of this lodge, whose address you know.He will show them when to act and where. Yours in freedom,"J. W. Windle D. M. A. O. F.
"Windle has never refused us when we have had occasion to ask for theloan of a man or two, and it is not for us to refuse him." McGintypaused and looked round the room with his dull, malevolent eyes. "Whowill volunteer for the job?"
Several young fellows held up their hands. The Bodymaster looked atthem with an approving smile.
"You'll do, Tiger Cormac. If you handle it as well as you did thelast, you won't be wrong. And you, Wilson."
"I've no pistol," said the volunteer, a mere boy in his teens.
"It's your first, is it not? Well, you have to be blooded some time.It will be a great start for you. As to the pistol, you'll find itwaiting for you, or I'm mistaken. If you report yourselves on Monday,it will be time enough. You'll get a great welcome when you return."
"Any reward this time?" asked Cormac, a thick-set, dark-faced,brutal-looking young man, whose ferocity had earned him the nicknameof "Tiger."
"Never mind the reward. You just do it for the honour of the thing.Maybe when it is done there will be a few odd dollars at the bottomof the box."
"What has the man done?" asked young Wilson.
"Sure, it's not for the likes of you to ask what the man has done. Hehas been judged over there. That's no business of ours. All we haveto do is to carry it out for them, same as they would for us.Speaking of that, two brothers from the Merton lodge are coming overto us next week to do some business in this quarter."
"Who are they?" asked someone.
"Faith, it is wiser not to ask. If you know nothing, you can testifynothing, and no trouble can come of it. But they are men who willmake a clean job when they are about it."
"And time, too!" cried Ted Baldwin. "Folk are gettin' out of hand inthese parts. It was only last week that three of our men were turnedoff by Foreman Blaker. It's been owing him a long time, and he'll getit full and proper."
"Get what?" McMurdo whispered to his neighbour.
"The business end of a buckshot cartridge!" cried the man with a loudlaugh. "What think you of our ways, Brother?"
McMurdo's criminal soul seemed to have already absorbed the spirit ofthe vile association of which he was now a member. "I like it well,"said he. "'Tis a proper place for a lad of mettle."
Several of those who sat around heard his words and applauded them.
"What's that?" cried the black-maned Bodymaster from the end of thetable.
"'Tis our new brother, sir, who finds our ways to his taste."
McMurdo rose to his feet for an instant. "I would say, EminentBodymaster, that if a man should be wanted I should take it as anhonour to be chosen to help the lodge."
There was great applause at this. It was felt that a new sun waspushing its rim above the horizon. To some of the elders it seemedthat the progress was a little too rapid.
"I would move," said the secretary, Harraway, a vulture-faced oldgraybeard who sat near the chairman, "that Brother McMurdo shouldwait until it is the good pleasure of the lodge to employ him."
"Sure, that was what I meant; I'm in your hands," said McMurdo.
"Your time will come, Brother," said the chairman. "We have markedyou down as a willing man, and we believe that you will do good workin these parts. There is a small matter to-night in which you maytake a hand if it so please you."
"I will wait for something that is worth while."
"You can come to-night, anyhow, and it will help you to know what westand for in this community. I will make the announcement later.Meanwhile," he glanced at his agenda paper, "I have one or two morepoints to bring before the meeting. First of all, I will ask thetreasurer as to our bank balance. There is the pension to JimCarnaway's widow. He was struck down doing the work of the lodge, andit is for us to see that she is not the loser."
"Jim was shot last month when they tried to kill Chester Wilcox ofMarley Creek," McMurdo's neighbour informed him.
"The funds are good at the moment," said the treasurer, with thebankbook in front of him. "The firms have been generous of late. MaxLinder & Co. paid five hundred to be left alone. Walker Brothers sentin a hundred; but I took it on myself to return it and ask for five.If I do not hear by Wednesday, their winding gear may get out oforder. We had to burn their breaker last year before they becamereasonable. Then the West Section Coaling Company has paid its annualcontribution. We have enough on hand to meet any obligations."
"What about Archie Swindon?" asked a brother.
"He has sold out and left the district. The old devil left a note forus to say that he had rather be a free crossing sweeper in New Yorkthan a large mine owner under the power of a ring of blackmailers. ByGar! it was as well that he made a break for it before the notereached us! I guess he won't show his face in this valley again."
An elderly, clean-shaved man with a kindly face and a good brow rosefrom the end of the table which faced the chairman. "Mr. Treasurer,"he asked, "may I ask who has bought the property of this man that wehave driven out of the district?"
"Yes, Brother Morris. It has been bought by the State & Merton CountyRailroad Company."
"And who bought the mines of Todman and of Lee that came into themarket in the same way last year?"
"The same company, Brother Morris."
"And who bought the ironworks of Manson and of Shuman and of VanDeher and of Atwood, which have all been given up of late?"
"They were all bought by the West Gilmerton General Mining Company."
"I don't see, Brother Morris," said the chairman, "that it matters tous who buys them, since they can't carry them out of the district."
"With all respect to you, Eminent Bodymaster, I think it may mattervery much to us. This process has been going on now for ten longyears. We are gradually driving all the small men out of trade. Whatis the result? We find in their places great companies like theRailroad or the General Iron, who have their directors in New York orPhiladelphia, and care nothing for our threats. We can take it out oftheir local bosses, but it only means that others will be sent intheir stead. And we are making it dangerous for ourselves. The smallmen could not harm us. They had not the money nor the power. So longas we did not squeeze them too dry, they would stay on under ourpower. But if these big companies find that we stand between them andtheir profits, they will spare no pains and no expense to hunt usdown and bring us to court."
There was a hush at these ominous words, and every face darkened asgloomy looks were exchanged. So omnipotent and unchallenged had theybeen that the very thought that there was possible retribution in thebackground had been banished from their minds. And yet the ideastruck a chill to the most reckless of them.
"It is my advice," the speaker continued, "that we go easier upon thesmall men. On the day that they have all been driven out the power ofthis society will have been broken."
Unwelcome truths are not popular. There were angry cries as thespeaker resumed his seat. McGinty rose with gloom upon his brow.
"Brother Morris," said he, "you were always a croaker. So long as themembers of this lodge stand together there is no power in the UnitedStates that can touch them. Sure, have we not tried it often enoughin the law courts? I expect the big companies will find it easier topay than to fight, same as the little companies do. And now,Brethren," McGinty took off his black velvet cap and his stole as hespoke, "this lodge has finished its business for the evening, savefor one small matter which may be mentioned when we are parting. Thetime has now come for fraternal refreshment and for harmony."
Strange indeed is human nature. Here were these men, to whom murderwas familiar, who again and again had struck down the father of thefamily, some man against whom they had no personal feeling, withoutone thought of compunction or of compassion for his weeping wife orhelpless children, and yet the tender or pathetic in music could movethem to tears. McMurdo had a fine tenor voice, and if he had failedto gain the good will of the lodge before, it could no longer havebeen withheld after he had thrilled them with "I'm Sitting on theStile, Mary," and "On the Banks of Allan Water."
In his very first night the new recruit had made himself one of themost popular of the brethren, marked already for advancement and highoffice. There were other qualities needed, however, besides those ofgood fellowship, to make a worthy Freeman, and of these he was givenan example before the evening was over. The whisky bottle had passedround many times, and the men were flushed and ripe for mischief whentheir Bodymaster rose once more to address them.
"Boys," said he, "there's one man in this town that wants trimmingup, and it's for you to see that he gets it. I'm speaking of JamesStanger of the Herald. You've seen how he's been opening his mouthagainst us again?"
There was a murmur of assent, with many a muttered oath. McGinty tooka slip of paper from his waistcoat pocket.
                            Law and Order!
That's how he heads it.
            "Reign of terror in the coal and iron district"Twelve years have now elapsed since the first assassinations whichproved the existence of a criminal organization in our midst. Fromthat day these outrages have never ceased, until now they havereached a pitch which makes us the opprobrium of the civilized world.Is it for such results as this that our great country welcomes to itsbosom the alien who flies from the despotisms of Europe? Is it thatthey shall themselves become tyrants over the very men who have giventhem shelter, and that a state of terrorism and lawlessness should beestablished under the very shadow of the sacred folds of the starryFlag of Freedom which would raise horror in our minds if we read ofit as existing under the most effete monarchy of the East? The menare known. The organization is patent and public. How long are we toendure it? Can we forever live--
Sure, I've read enough of the slush!" cried the chairman, tossing thepaper down upon the table. "That's what he says of us. The questionI'm asking you is what shall we say to him?"
"Kill him!" cried a dozen fierce voices.
"I protest against that," said Brother Morris, the man of the goodbrow and shaved face. "I tell you, Brethren, that our hand is tooheavy in this valley, and that there will come a point where inself-defense every man will unite to crush us out. James Stanger isan old man. He is respected in the township and the district. Hispaper stands for all that is solid in the valley. If that man isstruck down, there will be a stir through this state that will onlyend with our destruction."
"And how would they bring about our destruction, Mr. Standback?"cried McGinty. "Is it by the police? Sure, half of them are in ourpay and half of them afraid of us. Or is it by the law courts and thejudge? Haven't we tried that before now, and what ever came of it?"
"There is a Judge Lynch that might try the case," said BrotherMorris.
A general shout of anger greeted the suggestion.
"I have but to raise my finger," cried McGinty, "and I could put twohundred men into this town that would clear it out from end to end."Then suddenly raising his voice and bending his huge black brows intoa terrible frown, "See here, Brother Morris, I have my eye on you,and have had for some time! You've no heart yourself, and you try totake the heart out of others. It will be an ill day for you, BrotherMorris, when your own name comes on our agenda paper, and I'mthinking that it's just there that I ought to place it."
Morris had turned deadly pale, and his knees seemed to give way underhim as he fell back into his chair. He raised his glass in histrembling hand and drank before he could answer. "I apologize,Eminent Bodymaster, to you and to every brother in this lodge if Ihave said more than I should. I am a faithful member--you all knowthat--and it is my fear lest evil come to the lodge which makes mespeak in anxious words. But I have greater trust in your judgmentthan in my own, Eminent Bodymaster, and I promise you that I will notoffend again."
The Bodymaster's scowl relaxed as he listened to the humble words."Very good, Brother Morris. It's myself that would be sorry if itwere needful to give you a lesson. But so long as I am in this chairwe shall be a united lodge in word and in deed. And now, boys," hecontinued, looking round at the company, "I'll say this much, that ifStanger got his full deserts there would be more trouble than we needask for. These editors hang together, and every journal in the statewould be crying out for police and troops. But I guess you can givehim a pretty severe warning. Will you fix it, Brother Baldwin?"
"Sure!" said the young man eagerly.
"How many will you take?"
"Half a dozen, and two to guard the door. You'll come, Gower, andyou, Mansel, and you, Scanlan, and the two Willabys."
"I promised the new brother he should go," said the chairman.
Ted Baldwin looked at McMurdo with eyes which showed that he had notforgotten nor forgiven. "Well, he can come if he wants," he said in asurly voice. "That's enough. The sooner we get to work the better."
The company broke up with shouts and yells and snatches of drunkensong. The bar was still crowded with revellers, and many of thebrethren remained there. The little band who had been told off forduty passed out into the street, proceeding in twos and threes alongthe sidewalk so as not to provoke attention. It was a bitterly coldnight, with a half-moon shining brilliantly in a frosty,star-spangled sky. The men stopped and gathered in a yard which faceda high building. The words "Vermissa Herald" were printed in goldlettering between the brightly lit windows. From within came theclanking of the printing press.
"Here, you," said Baldwin to McMurdo, "you can stand below at thedoor and see that the road is kept open for us. Arthur Willaby canstay with you. You others come with me. Have no fears, boys; for wehave a dozen witnesses that we are in the Union Bar at this verymoment."
It was nearly midnight, and the street was deserted save for one ortwo revellers upon their way home. The party crossed the road, and,pushing open the door of the newspaper office, Baldwin and his menrushed in and up the stair which faced them. McMurdo and anotherremained below. From the room above came a shout, a cry for help, andthen the sound of trampling feet and of falling chairs. An instantlater a gray-haired man rushed out on the landing.
He was seized before he could get farther, and his spectacles cametinkling down to McMurdo's feet. There was a thud and a groan. He wason his face, and half a dozen sticks were clattering together as theyfell upon him. He writhed, and his long, thin limbs quivered underthe blows. The others ceased at last; but Baldwin, his cruel face setin an infernal smile, was hacking at the man's head, which he vainlyendeavoured to defend with his arms. His white hair was dabbled withpatches of blood. Baldwin was still stooping over his victim, puttingin a short, vicious blow whenever he could see a part exposed, whenMcMurdo dashed up the stair and pushed him back.
"You'll kill the man," said he. "Drop it!"
Baldwin looked at him in amazement. "Curse you!" he cried. "Who areyou to interfere--you that are new to the lodge? Stand back!" Heraised his stick; but McMurdo had whipped his pistol out of his hippocket.
"Stand back yourself!" he cried. "I'll blow your face in if you lay ahand on me. As to the lodge, wasn't it the order of the Bodymasterthat the man was not to be killed--and what are you doing but killinghim?"
"It's truth he says," remarked one of the men.
"By Gar! you'd best hurry yourselves!" cried the man below. "Thewindows are all lighting up, and you'll have the whole town hereinside of five minutes."
There was indeed the sound of shouting in the street, and a littlegroup of compositors and pressmen was forming in the hall below andnerving itself to action. Leaving the limp and motionless body of theeditor at the head of the stair, the criminals rushed down and madetheir way swiftly along the street. Having reached the Union House,some of them mixed with the crowd in McGinty's saloon, whisperingacross the bar to the Boss that the job had been well carriedthrough. Others, and among them McMurdo, broke away into sidestreets, and so by devious paths to their own homes.




     CHAPTER IV     The Valley of Fear

When McMurdo awoke next morning he had good reason to remember hisinitiation into the lodge. His head ached with the effect of thedrink, and his arm, where he had been branded, was hot and swollen.Having his own peculiar source of income, he was irregular in hisattendance at his work; so he had a late breakfast, and remained athome for the morning writing a long letter to a friend. Afterwards heread the Daily Herald. In a special column put in at the last momenthe read:
       Outrage at the herald office -- Editor seriously injured
It was a short account of the facts with which he was himself morefamiliar than the writer could have been. It ended with thestatement:
The matter is now in the hands of the police; but it can hardly behoped that their exertions will be attended by any better resultsthan in the past. Some of the men were recognized, and there is hopethat a conviction may be obtained. The source of the outrage was, itneed hardly be said, that infamous society which has held thiscommunity in bondage for so long a period, and against which theHerald has taken so uncompromising a stand. Mr. Stanger's manyfriends will rejoice to hear that, though he has been cruelly andbrutally beaten, and though he has sustained severe injuries aboutthe head, there is no immediate danger to his life.
Below it stated that a guard of police, armed with Winchester rifles,had been requisitioned for the defense of the office.
McMurdo had laid down the paper, and was lighting his pipe with ahand which was shaky from the excesses of the previous evening, whenthere was a knock outside, and his landlady brought to him a notewhich had just been handed in by a lad. It was unsigned, and ranthus:
I should wish to speak to you, but would rather not do so in yourhouse. You will find me beside the flagstaff upon Miller Hill. If youwill come there now, I have something which it is important for youto hear and for me to say.
McMurdo read the note twice with the utmost surprise; for he couldnot imagine what it meant or who was the author of it. Had it been ina feminine hand, he might have imagined that it was the beginning ofone of those adventures which had been familiar enough in his pastlife. But it was the writing of a man, and of a well educated one,too. Finally, after some hesitation, he determined to see the matterthrough.
Miller Hill is an ill-kept public park in the very centre of thetown. In summer it is a favourite resort of the people; but in winterit is desolate enough. From the top of it one has a view not only ofthe whole straggling, grimy town, but of the winding valley beneath,with its scattered mines and factories blackening the snow on eachside of it, and of the wooded and white-capped ranges flanking it.
McMurdo strolled up the winding path hedged in with evergreens untilhe reached the deserted restaurant which forms the centre of summergaiety. Beside it was a bare flagstaff, and underneath it a man, hishat drawn down and the collar of his overcoat turned up. When heturned his face McMurdo saw that it was Brother Morris, he who hadincurred the anger of the Bodymaster the night before. The lodge signwas given and exchanged as they met.
"I wanted to have a word with you, Mr. McMurdo," said the older man,speaking with a hesitation which showed that he was on delicateground. "It was kind of you to come."
"Why did you not put your name to the note?"
"One has to be cautious, mister. One never knows in times like thesehow a thing may come back to one. One never knows either who to trustor who not to trust."
"Surely one may trust brothers of the lodge."
"No, no, not always," cried Morris with vehemence. "Whatever we say,even what we think, seems to go back to that man McGinty."
"Look here!" said McMurdo sternly. "It was only last night, as youknow well, that I swore good faith to our Bodymaster. Would you beasking me to break my oath?"
"If that is the view you take," said Morris sadly, "I can only saythat I am sorry I gave you the trouble to come and meet me. Thingshave come to a bad pass when two free citizens cannot speak theirthoughts to each other."
McMurdo, who had been watching his companion very narrowly, relaxedsomewhat in his bearing. "Sure I spoke for myself only," said he. "Iam a newcomer, as you know, and I am strange to it all. It is not forme to open my mouth, Mr. Morris, and if you think well to sayanything to me I am here to hear it."
"And to take it back to Boss McGinty!" said Morris bitterly.
"Indeed, then, you do me injustice there," cried McMurdo. "For myselfI am loyal to the lodge, and so I tell you straight; but I would be apoor creature if I were to repeat to any other what you might say tome in confidence. It will go no further than me; though I warn youthat you may get neither help nor sympathy."
"I have given up looking for either the one or the other," saidMorris. "I may be putting my very life in your hands by what I say;but, bad as you are--and it seemed to me last night that you wereshaping to be as bad as the worst--still you are new to it, and yourconscience cannot yet be as hardened as theirs. That was why Ithought to speak with you."
"Well, what have you to say?"
"If you give me away, may a curse be on you!"
"Sure, I said I would not."
"I would ask you, then, when you joined the Freeman's society inChicago and swore vows of charity and fidelity, did ever it crossyour mind that you might find it would lead you to crime?"
"If you call it crime," McMurdo answered.
"Call it crime!" cried Morris, his voice vibrating with passion. "Youhave seen little of it if you can call it anything else. Was it crimelast night when a man old enough to be your father was beaten tillthe blood dripped from his white hairs? Was that crime--or what elsewould you call it?"
"There are some would say it was war," said McMurdo, "a war of twoclasses with all in, so that each struck as best it could."
"Well, did you think of such a thing when you joined the Freeman'ssociety at Chicago?"
"No, I'm bound to say I did not."
"Nor did I when I joined it at Philadelphia. It was just a benefitclub and a meeting place for one's fellows. Then I heard of thisplace--curse the hour that the name first fell upon my ears!--and Icame to better myself! My God! to better myself! My wife and threechildren came with me. I started a dry goods store on Market Square,and I prospered well. The word had gone round that I was a Freeman,and I was forced to join the local lodge, same as you did last night.I've the badge of shame on my forearm and something worse branded onmy heart. I found that I was under the orders of a black villain andcaught in a meshwork of crime. What could I do? Every word I said tomake things better was taken as treason, same as it was last night. Ican't get away; for all I have in the world is in my store. If Ileave the society, I know well that it means murder to me, and Godknows what to my wife and children. Oh, man, it is awful--awful!" Heput his hands to his face, and his body shook with convulsive sobs.
McMurdo shrugged his shoulders. "You were too soft for the job," saidhe. "You are the wrong sort for such work."
"I had a conscience and a religion; but they made me a criminal amongthem. I was chosen for a job. If I backed down I knew well what wouldcome to me. Maybe I'm a coward. Maybe it's the thought of my poorlittle woman and the children that makes me one. Anyhow I went. Iguess it will haunt me forever.
"It was a lonely house, twenty miles from here, over the rangeyonder. I was told off for the door, same as you were last night.They could not trust me with the job. The others went in. When theycame out their hands were crimson to the wrists. As we turned away achild was screaming out of the house behind us. It was a boy of fivewho had seen his father murdered. I nearly fainted with the horror ofit, and yet I had to keep a bold and smiling face; for well I knewthat if I did not it would be out of my house that they would comenext with their bloody hands and it would be my little Fred thatwould be screaming for his father.
"But I was a criminal then, part sharer in a murder, lost forever inthis world, and lost also in the next. I am a good Catholic; but thepriest would have no word with me when he heard I was a Scowrer, andI am excommunicated from my faith. That's how it stands with me. AndI see you going down the same road, and I ask you what the end is tobe. Are you ready to be a cold-blooded murderer also, or can we doanything to stop it?"
"What would you do?" asked McMurdo abruptly. "You would not inform?"
"God forbid!" cried Morris. "Sure, the very thought would cost me mylife."
"That's well," said McMurdo. "I'm thinking that you are a weak manand that you make too much of the matter."
"Too much! Wait till you have lived here longer. Look down thevalley! See the cloud of a hundred chimneys that overshadows it! Itell you that the cloud of murder hangs thicker and lower than thatover the heads of the people. It is the Valley of Fear, the Valley ofDeath. The terror is in the hearts of the people from the dusk to thedawn. Wait, young man, and you will learn for yourself."
"Well, I'll let you know what I think when I have seen more," saidMcMurdo carelessly. "What is very clear is that you are not the manfor the place, and that the sooner you sell out--if you only get adime a dollar for what the business is worth--the better it will befor you. What you have said is safe with me; but, by Gar! if Ithought you were an informer--"
"No, no!" cried Morris piteously.
"Well, let it rest at that. I'll bear what you have said in mind, andmaybe some day I'll come back to it. I expect you meant kindly byspeaking to me like this. Now I'll be getting home."
"One word before you go," said Morris. "We may have been seentogether. They may want to know what we have spoken about."
"Ah! that's well thought of."
"I offer you a clerkship in my store."
"And I refuse it. That's our business. Well, so long, Brother Morris,and may you find things go better with you in the future."
That same afternoon, as McMurdo sat smoking, lost in thought besidethe stove of his sitting-room, the door swung open and its frameworkwas filled with the huge figure of Boss McGinty. He passed the sign,and then seating himself opposite to the young man he looked at himsteadily for some time, a look which was as steadily returned.
"I'm not much of a visitor, Brother McMurdo," he said at last. "Iguess I am too busy over the folk that visit me. But I thought I'dstretch a point and drop down to see you in your own house."
"I'm proud to see you here, Councillor," McMurdo answered heartily,bringing his whisky bottle out of the cupboard. "It's an honour thatI had not expected."
"How's the arm?" asked the Boss.
McMurdo made a wry face. "Well, I'm not forgetting it," he said; "butit's worth it."
"Yes, it's worth it," the other answered, "to those that are loyaland go through with it and are a help to the lodge. What were youspeaking to Brother Morris about on Miller Hill this morning?"
The question came so suddenly that it was well that he had his answerprepared. He burst into a hearty laugh. "Morris didn't know I couldearn a living here at home. He shan't know either; for he has got toomuch conscience for the likes of me. But he's a good-hearted oldchap. It was his idea that I was at a loose end, and that he would dome a good turn by offering me a clerkship in a dry goods store."
"Oh, that was it?"
"Yes, that was it."
"And you refused it?"
"Sure. Couldn't I earn ten times as much in my own bedroom with fourhours' work?"
"That's so. But I wouldn't get about too much with Morris."
"Why not?"
"Well, I guess because I tell you not. That's enough for most folk inthese parts."
"It may be enough for most folk; but it ain't enough for me,Councillor," said McMurdo boldly. "If you are a judge of men, you'llknow that."
The swarthy giant glared at him, and his hairy paw closed for aninstant round the glass as though he would hurl it at the head of hiscompanion. Then he laughed in his loud, boisterous, insincerefashion.
"You're a queer card, for sure," said he. "Well, if you want reasons,I'll give them. Did Morris say nothing to you against the lodge?"
"No."
"Nor against me?"
"No."
"Well, that's because he daren't trust you. But in his heart he isnot a loyal brother. We know that well. So we watch him and we waitfor the time to admonish him. I'm thinking that the time is drawingnear. There's no room for scabby sheep in our pen. But if you keepcompany with a disloyal man, we might think that you were disloyal,too. See?"
"There's no chance of my keeping company with him; for I dislike theman," McMurdo answered. "As to being disloyal, if it was any man butyou he would not use the word to me twice."
"Well, that's enough," said McGinty, draining off his glass. "I camedown to give you a word in season, and you've had it."
"I'd like to know," said McMurdo, "how you ever came to learn that Ihad spoken with Morris at all?"
McGinty laughed. "It's my business to know what goes on in thistownship," said he. "I guess you'd best reckon on my hearing all thatpasses. Well, time's up, and I'll just say--"
But his leavetaking was cut short in a very unexpected fashion. Witha sudden crash the door flew open, and three frowning, intent facesglared in at them from under the peaks of police caps. McMurdo sprangto his feet and half drew his revolver; but his arm stopped midway ashe became conscious that two Winchester rifles were levelled at hishead. A man in uniform advanced into the room, a six-shooter in hishand. It was Captain Marvin, once of Chicago, and now of the MineConstabulary. He shook his head with a half-smile at McMurdo.
"I thought you'd be getting into trouble, Mr. Crooked McMurdo ofChicago," said he. "Can't keep out of it, can you? Take your hat andcome along with us."
"I guess you'll pay for this, Captain Marvin," said McGinty. "Who areyou, I'd like to know, to break into a house in this fashion andmolest honest, law-abiding men?"
"You're standing out in this deal, Councillor McGinty," said thepolice captain. "We are not out after you, but after this manMcMurdo. It is for you to help, not to hinder us in our duty,"
"He is a friend of mine, and I'll answer for his conduct," said theBoss.
"By all accounts, Mr. McGinty, you may have to answer for your ownconduct some of these days," the captain answered. "This man McMurdowas a crook before ever he came here, and he's a crook still. Coverhim, Patrolman, while I disarm him."
"There's my pistol," said McMurdo coolly. "Maybe, Captain Marvin, ifyou and I were alone and face to face you would not take me soeasily."
"Where's your warrant?" asked McGinty. "By Gar! a man might as welllive in Russia as in Vermissa while folk like you are running thepolice. It's a capitalist outrage, and you'll hear more of it, Ireckon."
"You do what you think is your duty the best way you can, Councillor.We'll look after ours."
"What am I accused of?" asked McMurdo.
"Of being concerned in the beating of old Editor Stanger at theHerald office. It wasn't your fault that it isn't a murder charge."
"Well, if that's all you have against him," cried McGinty with alaugh, "you can save yourself a deal of trouble by dropping it rightnow. This man was with me in my saloon playing poker up to midnight,and I can bring a dozen to prove it."
"That's your affair, and I guess you can settle it in courtto-morrow. Meanwhile, come on, McMurdo, and come quietly if you don'twant a gun across your head. You stand wide, Mr. McGinty; for I warnyou I will stand no resistance when I am on duty!"
So determined was the appearance of the captain that both McMurdo andhis boss were forced to accept the situation. The latter managed tohave a few whispered words with the prisoner before they parted.
"What about--" he jerked his thumb upward to signify the coiningplant.
"All right," whispered McMurdo, who had devised a safe hiding placeunder the floor.
"I'll bid you good-bye," said the Boss, shaking hands. "I'll seeReilly the lawyer and take the defense upon myself. Take my word forit that they won't be able to hold you."
"I wouldn't bet on that. Guard the prisoner, you two, and shoot himif he tries any games. I'll search the house before I leave."
He did so; but apparently found no trace of the concealed plant. Whenhe had descended he and his men escorted McMurdo to headquarters.Darkness had fallen, and a keen blizzard was blowing so that thestreets were nearly deserted; but a few loiterers followed the group,and emboldened by invisibility shouted imprecations at the prisoner.
"Lynch the cursed Scowrer!" they cried. "Lynch him!" They laughed andjeered as he was pushed into the police station. After a short,formal examination from the inspector in charge he was put into thecommon cell. Here he found Baldwin and three other criminals of thenight before, all arrested that afternoon and waiting their trialnext morning.
But even within this inner fortress of the law the long arm of theFreemen was able to extend. Late at night there came a jailer with astraw bundle for their bedding, out of which he extracted two bottlesof whisky, some glasses, and a pack of cards. They spent a hilariousnight, without an anxious thought as to the ordeal of the morning.
Nor had they cause, as the result was to show. The magistrate couldnot possibly, on the evidence, have held them for a higher court. Onthe one hand the compositors and pressmen were forced to admit thatthe light was uncertain, that they were themselves much perturbed,and that it was difficult for them to swear to the identity of theassailants; although they believed that the accused were among them.Cross examined by the clever attorney who had been engaged byMcGinty, they were even more nebulous in their evidence.
The injured man had already deposed that he was so taken by surpriseby the suddenness of the attack that he could state nothing beyondthe fact that the first man who struck him wore a moustache. He addedthat he knew them to be Scowrers, since no one else in the communitycould possibly have any enmity to him, and he had long beenthreatened on account of his outspoken editorials. On the other hand,it was clearly shown by the united and unfaltering evidence of sixcitizens, including that high municipal official, Councillor McGinty,that the men had been at a card party at the Union House until anhour very much later than the commission of the outrage.
Needless to say that they were discharged with something very near toan apology from the bench for the inconvenience to which they hadbeen put, together with an implied censure of Captain Marvin and thepolice for their officious zeal.
The verdict was greeted with loud applause by a court in whichMcMurdo saw many familiar faces. Brothers of the lodge smiled andwaved. But there were others who sat with compressed lips andbrooding eyes as the men filed out of the dock. One of them, alittle, dark-bearded, resolute fellow, put the thoughts of himselfand comrades into words as the ex-prisoners passed him.
"You damned murderers!" he said. "We'll fix you yet!"




     CHAPTER V     The Darkest Hour

If anything had been needed to give an impetus to Jack McMurdo'spopularity among his fellows it would have been his arrest andacquittal. That a man on the very night of joining the lodge shouldhave done something which brought him before the magistrate was a newrecord in the annals of the society. Already he had earned thereputation of a good boon companion, a cheery reveller, and withal aman of high temper, who would not take an insult even from theall-powerful Boss himself. But in addition to this he impressed hiscomrades with the idea that among them all there was not one whosebrain was so ready to devise a bloodthirsty scheme, or whose handwould be more capable of carrying it out. "He'll be the boy for theclean job," said the oldsters to one another, and waited their timeuntil they could set him to his work.
McGinty had instruments enough already; but he recognized that thiswas a supremely able one. He felt like a man holding a fiercebloodhound in leash. There were curs to do the smaller work; but someday he would slip this creature upon its prey. A few members of thelodge, Ted Baldwin among them, resented the rapid rise of thestranger and hated him for it; but they kept clear of him, for he wasas ready to fight as to laugh.
But if he gained favour with his fellows, there was another quarter,one which had become even more vital to him, in which he lost it.Ettie Shafter's father would have nothing more to do with him, norwould he allow him to enter the house. Ettie herself was too deeplyin love to give him up altogether, and yet her own good sense warnedher of what would come from a marriage with a man who was regarded asa criminal.
One morning after a sleepless night she determined to see him,possibly for the last time, and make one strong endeavour to draw himfrom those evil influences which were sucking him down. She went tohis house, as he had often begged her to do, and made her way intothe room which he used as his sitting-room. He was seated at a table,with his back turned and a letter in front of him. A sudden spirit ofgirlish mischief came over her--she was still only nineteen. He hadnot heard her when she pushed open the door. Now she tiptoed forwardand laid her hand lightly upon his bended shoulders.
If she had expected to startle him, she certainly succeeded; but onlyin turn to be startled herself. With a tiger spring he turned on her,and his right hand was feeling for her throat. At the same instantwith the other hand he crumpled up the paper that lay before him. Foran instant he stood glaring. Then astonishment and joy took the placeof the ferocity which had convulsed his features--a ferocity whichhad sent her shrinking back in horror as from something which hadnever before intruded into her gentle life.
"It's you!" said he, mopping his brow. "And to think that you shouldcome to me, heart of my heart, and I should find nothing better to dothan to want to strangle you! Come then, darling," and he held outhis arms, "let me make it up to you."
But she had not recovered from that sudden glimpse of guilty fearwhich she had read in the man's face. All her woman's instinct toldher that it was not the mere fright of a man who is startled.Guilt--that was it--guilt and fear!
"What's come over you, Jack?" she cried. "Why were you so scared ofme? Oh, Jack, if your conscience was at ease, you would not havelooked at me like that!"
"Sure, I was thinking of other things, and when you came tripping solightly on those fairy feet of yours--"
"No, no, it was more than that, Jack." Then a sudden suspicion seizedher. "Let me see that letter you were writing."
"Ah, Ettie, I couldn't do that."
Her suspicions became certainties. "It's to another woman," shecried. "I know it! Why else should you hold it from me? Was it toyour wife that you were writing? How am I to know that you are not amarried man--you, a stranger, that nobody knows?"
"I am not married, Ettie. See now, I swear it! You're the only onewoman on earth to me. By the cross of Christ I swear it!"
He was so white with passionate earnestness that she could not butbelieve him.
"Well, then," she cried, "why will you not show me the letter?"
"I'll tell you, acushla," said he. "I'm under oath not to show it,and just as I wouldn't break my word to you so I would keep it tothose who hold my promise. It's the business of the lodge, and evento you it's secret. And if I was scared when a hand fell on me, can'tyou understand it when it might have been the hand of a detective?"
She felt that he was telling the truth. He gathered her into his armsand kissed away her fears and doubts.
"Sit here by me, then. It's a queer throne for such a queen; but it'sthe best your poor lover can find. He'll do better for you some ofthese days, I'm thinking. Now your mind is easy once again, is itnot?"
"How can it ever be at ease, Jack, when I know that you are acriminal among criminals, when I never know the day that I may hearyou are in court for murder? 'McMurdo the Scowrer,' that's what oneof our boarders called you yesterday. It went through my heart like aknife."
"Sure, hard words break no bones."
"But they were true."
"Well, dear, it's not so bad as you think. We are but poor men thatare trying in our own way to get our rights."
Ettie threw her arms round her lover's neck. "Give it up, Jack! Formy sake, for God's sake, give it up! It was to ask you that I camehere to-day. Oh, Jack, see--I beg it of you on my bended knees!Kneeling here before you I implore you to give it up!"
He raised her and soothed her with her head against his breast.
"Sure, my darlin', you don't know what it is you are asking. Howcould I give it up when it would be to break my oath and to desert mycomrades? If you could see how things stand with me you could neverask it of me. Besides, if I wanted to, how could I do it? You don'tsuppose that the lodge would let a man go free with all its secrets?"
"I've thought of that, Jack. I've planned it all. Father has savedsome money. He is weary of this place where the fear of these peopledarkens our lives. He is ready to go. We would fly together toPhiladelphia or New York, where we would be safe from them."
McMurdo laughed. "The lodge has a long arm. Do you think it could notstretch from here to Philadelphia or New York?"
"Well, then, to the West, or to England, or to Germany, where fathercame from--anywhere to get away from this Valley of Fear!"
McMurdo thought of old Brother Morris. "Sure, it is the second time Ihave heard the valley so named," said he. "The shadow does indeedseem to lie heavy on some of you."
"It darkens every moment of our lives. Do you suppose that TedBaldwin has ever forgiven us? If it were not that he fears you, whatdo you suppose our chances would be? If you saw the look in thosedark, hungry eyes of his when they fall on me!"
"By Gar! I'd teach him better manners if I caught him at it! But seehere, little girl. I can't leave here. I can't--take that from meonce and for all. But if you will leave me to find my own way, I willtry to prepare a way of getting honourably out of it."
"There is no honour in such a matter."
"Well, well, it's just how you look at it. But if you'll give me sixmonths, I'll work it so that I can leave without being ashamed tolook others in the face."
The girl laughed with joy. "Six months!" she cried. "Is it apromise?"
"Well, it may be seven or eight. But within a year at the furthest wewill leave the valley behind us."
It was the most that Ettie could obtain, and yet it was something.There was this distant light to illuminate the gloom of the immediatefuture. She returned to her father's house more light-hearted thanshe had ever been since Jack McMurdo had come into her life.
It might be thought that as a member, all the doings of the societywould be told to him; but he was soon to discover that theorganization was wider and more complex than the simple lodge. EvenBoss McGinty was ignorant as to many things; for there was anofficial named the County Delegate, living at Hobson's Patch fartherdown the line, who had power over several different lodges which hewielded in a sudden and arbitrary way. Only once did McMurdo see him,a sly, little gray-haired rat of a man, with a slinking gait and asidelong glance which was charged with malice. Evans Pott was hisname, and even the great Boss of Vermissa felt towards him somethingof the repulsion and fear which the huge Danton may have felt for thepuny but dangerous Robespierre.
One day Scanlan, who was McMurdo's fellow boarder, received a notefrom McGinty inclosing one from Evans Pott, which informed him thathe was sending over two good men, Lawler and Andrews, who hadinstructions to act in the neighbourhood; though it was best for thecause that no particulars as to their objects should be given. Wouldthe Bodymaster see to it that suitable arrangements be made for theirlodgings and comfort until the time for action should arrive? McGintyadded that it was impossible for anyone to remain secret at the UnionHouse, and that, therefore, he would be obliged if McMurdo andScanlan would put the strangers up for a few days in their boardinghouse.
The same evening the two men arrived, each carrying his gripsack.Lawler was an elderly man, shrewd, silent, and self-contained, cladin an old black frock coat, which with his soft felt hat and ragged,grizzled beard gave him a general resemblance to an itinerantpreacher. His companion Andrews was little more than a boy,frank-faced and cheerful, with the breezy manner of one who is outfor a holiday and means to enjoy every minute of it. Both men weretotal abstainers, and behaved in all ways as exemplary members of thesociety, with the one simple exception that they were assassins whohad often proved themselves to be most capable instruments for thisassociation of murder. Lawler had already carried out fourteencommissions of the kind, and Andrews three.
They were, as McMurdo found, quite ready to converse about theirdeeds in the past, which they recounted with the half-bashful prideof men who had done good and unselfish service for the community.They were reticent, however, as to the immediate job in hand.
"They chose us because neither I nor the boy here drink," Lawlerexplained. "They can count on us saying no more than we should. Youmust not take it amiss, but it is the orders of the County Delegatethat we obey."
"Sure, we are all in it together," said Scanlan, McMurdo's mate, asthe four sat together at supper.
"That's true enough, and we'll talk till the cows come home of thekilling of Charlie Williams or of Simon Bird, or any other job in thepast. But till the work is done we say nothing."
"There are half a dozen about here that I have a word to say to,"said McMurdo, with an oath. "I suppose it isn't Jack Knox of Ironhillthat you are after. I'd go some way to see him get his deserts."
"No, it's not him yet."
"Or Herman Strauss?"
"No, nor him either."
"Well, if you won't tell us we can't make you; but I'd be glad toknow."
Lawler smiled and shook his head. He was not to be drawn.
In spite of the reticence of their guests, Scanlan and McMurdo werequite determined to be present at what they called "the fun." When,therefore, at an early hour one morning McMurdo heard them creepingdown the stairs he awakened Scanlan, and the two hurried on theirclothes. When they were dressed they found that the others had stolenout, leaving the door open behind them. It was not yet dawn, and bythe light of the lamps they could see the two men some distance downthe street. They followed them warily, treading noiselessly in thedeep snow.
The boarding house was near the edge of the town, and soon they wereat the crossroads which is beyond its boundary. Here three men werewaiting, with whom Lawler and Andrews held a short, eagerconversation. Then they all moved on together. It was clearly somenotable job which needed numbers. At this point there are severaltrails which lead to various mines. The strangers took that which ledto the Crow Hill, a huge business which was in strong hands which hadbeen able, thanks to their energetic and fearless New Englandmanager, Josiah H. Dunn, to keep some order and discipline during thelong reign of terror.
Day was breaking now, and a line of workmen were slowly making theirway, singly and in groups, along the blackened path.
McMurdo and Scanlan strolled on with the others, keeping in sight ofthe men whom they followed. A thick mist lay over them, and from theheart of it there came the sudden scream of a steam whistle. It wasthe ten-minute signal before the cages descended and the day's labourbegan.
When they reached the open space round the mine shaft there were ahundred miners waiting, stamping their feet and blowing on theirfingers; for it was bitterly cold. The strangers stood in a littlegroup under the shadow of the engine house. Scanlan and McMurdoclimbed a heap of slag from which the whole scene lay before them.They saw the mine engineer, a great bearded Scotchman named Menzies,come out of the engine house and blow his whistle for the cages to belowered.
At the same instant a tall, loose-framed young man with aclean-shaved, earnest face advanced eagerly towards the pit head. Ashe came forward his eyes fell upon the group, silent and motionless,under the engine house. The men had drawn down their hats and turnedup their collars to screen their faces. For a moment the presentimentof Death laid its cold hand upon the manager's heart. At the next hehad shaken it off and saw only his duty towards intrusive strangers.
"Who are you?" he asked as he advanced. "What are you loitering therefor?"
There was no answer; but the lad Andrews stepped forward and shot himin the stomach. The hundred waiting miners stood as motionless andhelpless as if they were paralyzed. The manager clapped his two handsto the wound and doubled himself up. Then he staggered away; butanother of the assassins fired, and he went down sidewise, kickingand clawing among a heap of clinkers. Menzies, the Scotchman, gave aroar of rage at the sight and rushed with an iron spanner at themurderers; but was met by two balls in the face which dropped himdead at their very feet.
There was a surge forward of some of the miners, and an inarticulatecry of pity and of anger; but a couple of the strangers emptied theirsix-shooters over the heads of the crowd, and they broke andscattered, some of them rushing wildly back to their homes inVermissa.
When a few of the bravest had rallied, and there was a return to themine, the murderous gang had vanished in the mists of morning,without a single witness being able to swear to the identity of thesemen who in front of a hundred spectators had wrought this doublecrime.
Scanlan and McMurdo made their way back; Scanlan somewhat subdued,for it was the first murder job that he had seen with his own eyes,and it appeared less funny than he had been led to believe. Thehorrible screams of the dead manager's wife pursued them as theyhurried to the town. McMurdo was absorbed and silent; but he showedno sympathy for the weakening of his companion.
"Sure, it is like a war," he repeated. "What is it but a war betweenus and them, and we hit back where we best can."
There was high revel in the lodge room at the Union House that night,not only over the killing of the manager and engineer of the CrowHill mine, which would bring this organization into line with theother blackmailed and terror-stricken companies of the district, butalso over a distant triumph which had been wrought by the hands ofthe lodge itself.
It would appear that when the County Delegate had sent over five goodmen to strike a blow in Vermissa, he had demanded that in returnthree Vermissa men should be secretly selected and sent across tokill William Hales of Stake Royal, one of the best known and mostpopular mine owners in the Gilmerton district, a man who was believednot to have an enemy in the world; for he was in all ways a modelemployer. He had insisted, however, upon efficiency in the work, andhad, therefore, paid off certain drunken and idle employees who weremembers of the all-powerful society. Coffin notices hung outside hisdoor had not weakened his resolution, and so in a free, civilizedcountry he found himself condemned to death.
The execution had now been duly carried out. Ted Baldwin, whosprawled now in the seat of honour beside the Bodymaster, had beenchief of the party. His flushed face and glazed, blood-shot eyes toldof sleeplessness and drink. He and his two comrades had spent thenight before among the mountains. They were unkempt andweather-stained. But no heroes, returning from a forlorn hope, couldhave had a warmer welcome from their comrades.
The story was told and retold amid cries of delight and shouts oflaughter. They had waited for their man as he drove home atnightfall, taking their station at the top of a steep hill, where hishorse must be at a walk. He was so furred to keep out the cold thathe could not lay his hand on his pistol. They had pulled him out andshot him again and again. He had screamed for mercy. The screams wererepeated for the amusement of the lodge.
"Let's hear again how he squealed," they cried.
None of them knew the man; but there is eternal drama in a killing,and they had shown the Scowrers of Gilmerton that the Vermissa menwere to be relied upon.
There had been one contretemps; for a man and his wife had driven upwhile they were still emptying their revolvers into the silent body.It had been suggested that they should shoot them both; but they wereharmless folk who were not connected with the mines, so they weresternly bidden to drive on and keep silent, lest a worse thing befallthem. And so the blood-mottled figure had been left as a warning toall such hard-hearted employers, and the three noble avengers hadhurried off into the mountains where unbroken nature comes down tothe very edge of the furnaces and the slag heaps. Here they were,safe and sound, their work well done, and the plaudits of theircompanions in their ears.
It had been a great day for the Scowrers. The shadow had fallen evendarker over the valley. But as the wise general chooses the moment ofvictory in which to redouble his efforts, so that his foes may haveno time to steady themselves after disaster, so Boss McGinty, lookingout upon the scene of his operations with his brooding and maliciouseyes, had devised a new attack upon those who opposed him. That verynight, as the half-drunken company broke up, he touched McMurdo onthe arm and led him aside into that inner room where they had theirfirst interview.
"See here, my lad," said he, "I've got a job that's worthy of you atlast. You'll have the doing of it in your own hands."
"Proud I am to hear it," McMurdo answered.
"You can take two men with you--Manders and Reilly. They have beenwarned for service. We'll never be right in this district untilChester Wilcox has been settled, and you'll have the thanks of everylodge in the coal fields if you can down him."
"I'll do my best, anyhow. Who is he, and where shall I find him?"
McGinty took his eternal half-chewed, half-smoked cigar from thecorner of his mouth, and proceeded to draw a rough diagram on a pagetorn from his notebook.
"He's the chief foreman of the Iron Dike Company. He's a hardcitizen, an old colour sergeant of the war, all scars and grizzle.We've had two tries at him; but had no luck, and Jim Carnaway losthis life over it. Now it's for you to take it over. That's thehouse--all alone at the Iron Dike crossroad, same as you see here onthe map--without another within earshot. It's no good by day. He'sarmed and shoots quick and straight, with no questions asked. But atnight--well, there he is with his wife, three children, and a hiredhelp. You can't pick or choose. It's all or none. If you could get abag of blasting powder at the front door with a slow match to it--"
"What's the man done?"
"Didn't I tell you he shot Jim Carnaway?"
"Why did he shoot him?"
"What in thunder has that to do with you? Carnaway was about hishouse at night, and he shot him. That's enough for me and you. You'vegot to settle the thing right."
"There's these two women and the children. Do they go up too?"
"They have to--else how can we get him?"
"It seems hard on them; for they've done nothing."
"What sort of fool's talk is this? Do you back out?"
"Easy, Councillor, easy! What have I ever said or done that youshould think I would be after standing back from an order of theBodymaster of my own lodge? If it's right or if it's wrong, it's foryou to decide."
"You'll do it, then?"
"Of course I will do it."
"When?"
"Well, you had best give me a night or two that I may see the houseand make my plans. Then--"
"Very good," said McGinty, shaking him by the hand. "I leave it withyou. It will be a great day when you bring us the news. It's just thelast stroke that will bring them all to their knees."
McMurdo thought long and deeply over the commission which had been sosuddenly placed in his hands. The isolated house in which ChesterWilcox lived was about five miles off in an adjacent valley. Thatvery night he started off all alone to prepare for the attempt. Itwas daylight before he returned from his reconnaissance. Next day heinterviewed his two subordinates, Manders and Reilly, recklessyoungsters who were as elated as if it were a deer-hunt.
Two nights later they met outside the town, all three armed, and oneof them carrying a sack stuffed with the powder which was used in thequarries. It was two in the morning before they came to the lonelyhouse. The night was a windy one, with broken clouds drifting swiftlyacross the face of a three-quarter moon. They had been warned to beon their guard against bloodhounds; so they moved forward cautiously,with their pistols cocked in their hands. But there was no sound savethe howling of the wind, and no movement but the swaying branchesabove them.
McMurdo listened at the door of the lonely house; but all was stillwithin. Then he leaned the powder bag against it, ripped a hole in itwith his knife, and attached the fuse. When it was well alight he andhis two companions took to their heels, and were some distance off,safe and snug in a sheltering ditch, before the shattering roar ofthe explosion, with the low, deep rumble of the collapsing building,told them that their work was done. No cleaner job had ever beencarried out in the bloodstained annals of the society.
But alas that work so well organized and boldly carried out shouldall have gone for nothing! Warned by the fate of the various victims,and knowing that he was marked down for destruction, Chester Wilcoxhad moved himself and his family only the day before to some saferand less known quarters, where a guard of police should watch overthem. It was an empty house which had been torn down by thegunpowder, and the grim old colour sergeant of the war was stillteaching discipline to the miners of Iron Dike.
"Leave him to me," said McMurdo. "He's my man, and I'll get him sureif I have to wait a year for him."
A vote of thanks and confidence was passed in full lodge, and so forthe time the matter ended. When a few weeks later it was reported inthe papers that Wilcox had been shot at from an ambuscade, it was anopen secret that McMurdo was still at work upon his unfinished job.
Such were the methods of the Society of Freemen, and such were thedeeds of the Scowrers by which they spread their rule of fear overthe great and rich district which was for so long a period haunted bytheir terrible presence. Why should these pages be stained by furthercrimes? Have I not said enough to show the men and their methods?
These deeds are written in history, and there are records wherein onemay read the details of them. There one may learn of the shooting ofPolicemen Hunt and Evans because they had ventured to arrest twomembers of the society--a double outrage planned at the Vermissalodge and carried out in cold blood upon two helpless and disarmedmen. There also one may read of the shooting of Mrs. Larbey when shewas nursing her husband, who had been beaten almost to death byorders of Boss McGinty. The killing of the elder Jenkins, shortlyfollowed by that of his brother, the mutilation of James Murdoch, theblowing up of the Staphouse family, and the murder of the Stendalsall followed hard upon one another in the same terrible winter.
Darkly the shadow lay upon the Valley of Fear. The spring had comewith running brooks and blossoming trees. There was hope for allNature bound so long in an iron grip; but nowhere was there any hopefor the men and women who lived under the yoke of the terror. Neverhad the cloud above them been so dark and hopeless as in the earlysummer of the year 1875.




     CHAPTER VI     Danger

It was the height of the reign of terror. McMurdo, who had alreadybeen appointed Inner Deacon, with every prospect of some daysucceeding McGinty as Bodymaster, was now so necessary to thecouncils of his comrades that nothing was done without his help andadvice. The more popular he became, however, with the Freemen, theblacker were the scowls which greeted him as he passed along thestreets of Vermissa. In spite of their terror the citizens weretaking heart to band themselves together against their oppressors.Rumours had reached the lodge of secret gatherings in the Heraldoffice and of distribution of firearms among the law-abiding people.But McGinty and his men were undisturbed by such reports. They werenumerous, resolute, and well armed. Their opponents were scatteredand powerless. It would all end, as it had done in the past, inaimless talk and possibly in impotent arrests. So said McGinty,McMurdo, and all the bolder spirits.
It was a Saturday evening in May. Saturday was always the lodgenight, and McMurdo was leaving his house to attend it when Morris,the weaker brother of the order, came to see him. His brow wascreased with care, and his kindly face was drawn and haggard.
"Can I speak with you freely, Mr. McMurdo?"
"Sure."
"I can't forget that I spoke my heart to you once, and that you keptit to yourself, even though the Boss himself came to ask you aboutit."
"What else could I do if you trusted me? It wasn't that I agreed withwhat you said."
"I know that well. But you are the one that I can speak to and besafe. I've a secret here," he put his hand to his breast, "and it isjust burning the life out of me. I wish it had come to any one of youbut me. If I tell it, it will mean murder, for sure. If I don't, itmay bring the end of us all. God help me, but I am near out of mywits over it!"
McMurdo looked at the man earnestly. He was trembling in every limb.He poured some whisky into a glass and handed it to him. "That's thephysic for the likes of you," said he. "Now let me hear of it."
Morris drank, and his white face took a tinge of colour. "I can tellit to you all in one sentence," said he. "There's a detective on ourtrail."
McMurdo stared at him in astonishment. "Why, man, you're crazy," hesaid. "Isn't the place full of police and detectives and what harmdid they ever do us?"
"No, no, it's no man of the district. As you say, we know them, andit is little that they can do. But you've heard of Pinkerton's?"
"I've read of some folk of that name."
"Well, you can take it from me you've no show when they are on yourtrail. It's not a take-it-or-miss-it government concern. It's a deadearnest business proposition that's out for results and keeps outtill by hook or crook it gets them. If a Pinkerton man is deep inthis business, we are all destroyed."
"We must kill him."
"Ah, it's the first thought that came to you! So it will be up at thelodge. Didn't I say to you that it would end in murder?"
"Sure, what is murder? Isn't it common enough in these parts?"
"It is, indeed; but it's not for me to point out the man that is tobe murdered. I'd never rest easy again. And yet it's our own necksthat may be at stake. In God's name what shall I do?" He rocked toand fro in his agony of indecision.
But his words had moved McMurdo deeply. It was easy to see that heshared the other's opinion as to the danger, and the need for meetingit. He gripped Morris's shoulder and shook him in his earnestness.
"See here, man," he cried, and he almost screeched the words in hisexcitement, "you won't gain anything by sitting keening like an oldwife at a wake. Let's have the facts. Who is the fellow? Where is he?How did you hear of him? Why did you come to me?"
"I came to you; for you are the one man that would advise me. I toldyou that I had a store in the East before I came here. I left goodfriends behind me, and one of them is in the telegraph service.Here's a letter that I had from him yesterday. It's this part fromthe top of the page. You can read it yourself."
This was what McMurdo read:
How are the Scowrers getting on in your parts? We read plenty of themin the papers. Between you and me I expect to hear news from youbefore long. Five big corporations and the two railroads have takenthe thing up in dead earnest. They mean it, and you can bet they'llget there! They are right deep down into it. Pinkerton has taken holdunder their orders, and his best man, Birdy Edwards, is operating.The thing has got to be stopped right now.
"Now read the postscript."
Of course, what I give you is what I learned in business; so it goesno further. It's a queer cipher that you handle by the yard every dayand can get no meaning from.
McMurdo sat in silence for some time, with the letter in his listlesshands. The mist had lifted for a moment, and there was the abyssbefore him.
"Does anyone else know of this?" he asked.
"I have told no one else."
"But this man--your friend--has he any other person that he would belikely to write to?"
"Well, I dare say he knows one or two more."
"Of the lodge?"
"It's likely enough."
"I was asking because it is likely that he may have given somedescription of this fellow Birdy Edwards--then we could get on histrail."
"Well, it's possible. But I should not think he knew him. He is justtelling me the news that came to him by way of business. How would heknow this Pinkerton man?"
McMurdo gave a violent start.
"By Gar!" he cried, "I've got him. What a fool I was not to know it.Lord! but we're in luck! We will fix him before he can do any harm.See here, Morris, will you leave this thing in my hands?"
"Sure, if you will only take it off mine."
"I'll do that. You can stand right back and let me run it. Even yourname need not be mentioned. I'll take it all on myself, as if it wereto me that this letter has come. Will that content you?"
"It's just what I would ask."
"Then leave it at that and keep your head shut. Now I'll get down tothe lodge, and we'll soon make old man Pinkerton sorry for himself."
"You wouldn't kill this man?"
"The less you know, Friend Morris, the easier your conscience willbe, and the better you will sleep. Ask no questions, and let thesethings settle themselves. I have hold of it now."
Morris shook his head sadly as he left. "I feel that his blood is onmy hands," he groaned.
"Self-protection is no murder, anyhow," said McMurdo, smiling grimly."It's him or us. I guess this man would destroy us all if we left himlong in the valley. Why, Brother Morris, we'll have to elect youBodymaster yet; for you've surely saved the lodge."
And yet it was clear from his actions that he thought more seriouslyof this new intrusion than his words would show. It may have been hisguilty conscience, it may have been the reputation of the Pinkertonorganization, it may have been the knowledge that great, richcorporations had set themselves the task of clearing out theScowrers; but, whatever his reason, his actions were those of a manwho is preparing for the worst. Every paper which would incriminatehim was destroyed before he left the house. After that he gave a longsigh of satisfaction; for it seemed to him that he was safe. And yetthe danger must still have pressed somewhat upon him; for on his wayto the lodge he stopped at old man Shafter's. The house was forbiddenhim; but when he tapped at the window Ettie came out to him. Thedancing Irish deviltry had gone from her lover's eyes. She read hisdanger in his earnest face.
"Something has happened!" she cried. "Oh, Jack, you are in danger!"
"Sure, it is not very bad, my sweetheart. And yet it may be wise thatwe make a move before it is worse."
"Make a move?"
"I promised you once that I would go some day. I think the time iscoming. I had news to-night, bad news, and I see trouble coming."
"The police?"
"Well, a Pinkerton. But, sure, you wouldn't know what that is,acushla, nor what it may mean to the likes of me. I'm too deep inthis thing, and I may have to get out of it quick. You said you wouldcome with me if I went."
"Oh, Jack, it would be the saving of you!"
"I'm an honest man in some things, Ettie. I wouldn't hurt a hair ofyour bonny head for all that the world can give, nor ever pull youdown one inch from the golden throne above the clouds where I alwayssee you. Would you trust me?"
She put her hand in his without a word. "Well, then, listen to what Isay, and do as I order you, for indeed it's the only way for us.Things are going to happen in this valley. I feel it in my bones.There may be many of us that will have to look out for ourselves. I'mone, anyhow. If I go, by day or night, it's you that must come withme!"
"I'd come after you, Jack."
"No, no, you shall come with me. If this valley is closed to me and Ican never come back, how can I leave you behind, and me perhaps inhiding from the police with never a chance of a message? It's with meyou must come. I know a good woman in the place I come from, and it'sthere I'd leave you till we can get married. Will you come?"
"Yes, Jack, I will come."
"God bless you for your trust in me! It's a fiend out of hell that Ishould be if I abused it. Now, mark you, Ettie, it will be just aword to you, and when it reaches you, you will drop everything andcome right down to the waiting room at the depot and stay there tillI come for you."
"Day or night, I'll come at the word, Jack."
Somewhat eased in mind, now that his own preparations for escape hadbeen begun, McMurdo went on to the lodge. It had already assembled,and only by complicated signs and counter-signs could he pass throughthe outer guard and inner guard who close-tiled it. A buzz ofpleasure and welcome greeted him as he entered. The long room wascrowded, and through the haze of tobacco smoke he saw the tangledblack mane of the Bodymaster, the cruel, unfriendly features ofBaldwin, the vulture face of Harraway, the secretary, and a dozenmore who were among the leaders of the lodge. He rejoiced that theyshould all be there to take counsel over his news.
"Indeed, it's glad we are to see you, Brother!" cried the chairman."There's business here that wants a Solomon in judgment to set itright."
"It's Lander and Egan," explained his neighbour as he took his seat."They both claim the head money given by the lodge for the shootingof old man Crabbe over at Stylestown, and who's to say which firedthe bullet?"
McMurdo rose in his place and raised his hand. The expression of hisface froze the attention of the audience. There was a dead hush ofexpectation.
"Eminent Bodymaster," he said, in a solemn voice, "I claim urgency!"
"Brother McMurdo claims urgency," said McGinty. "It's a claim that bythe rules of this lodge takes precedence. Now Brother, we attendyou."
McMurdo took the letter from his pocket.
"Eminent Bodymaster and Brethren," he said, "I am the bearer of illnews this day; but it is better that it should be known anddiscussed, than that a blow should fall upon us without warning whichwould destroy us all. I have information that the most powerful andrichest organizations in this state have bound themselves togetherfor our destruction, and that at this very moment there is aPinkerton detective, one Birdy Edwards, at work in the valleycollecting the evidence which may put a rope round the necks of manyof us, and send every man in this room into a felon's cell. That isthe situation for the discussion of which I have made a claim ofurgency."
There was a dead silence in the room. It was broken by the chairman.
"What is your evidence for this, Brother McMurdo?" he asked.
"It is in this letter which has come into my hands," said McMurdo. Heread the passage aloud. "It is a matter of honour with me that I cangive no further particulars about the letter, nor put it into yourhands; but I assure you that there is nothing else in it which canaffect the interests of the lodge. I put the case before you as ithas reached me."
"Let me say, Mr. Chairman," said one of the older brethren, "that Ihave heard of Birdy Edwards, and that he has the name of being thebest man in the Pinkerton service."
"Does anyone know him by sight?" asked McGinty.
"Yes," said McMurdo, "I do."
There was a murmur of astonishment through the hall.
"I believe we hold him in the hollow of our hands," he continued withan exulting smile upon his face. "If we act quickly and wisely, wecan cut this thing short. If I have your confidence and your help, itis little that we have to fear."
"What have we to fear, anyhow? What can he know of our affairs?"
"You might say so if all were as stanch as you, Councillor. But thisman has all the millions of the capitalists at his back. Do you thinkthere is no weaker brother among all our lodges that could not bebought? He will get at our secrets--maybe has got them already.There's only one sure cure."
"That he never leaves the valley," said Baldwin.
McMurdo nodded. "Good for you, Brother Baldwin," he said. "You and Ihave had our differences, but you have said the true word to-night."
"Where is he, then? Where shall we know him?"
"Eminent Bodymaster," said McMurdo, earnestly, "I would put it to youthat this is too vital a thing for us to discuss in open lodge. Godforbid that I should throw a doubt on anyone here; but if so much asa word of gossip got to the ears of this man, there would be an endof any chance of our getting him. I would ask the lodge to choose atrusty committee, Mr. Chairman--yourself, if I might suggest it, andBrother Baldwin here, and five more. Then I can talk freely of what Iknow and of what I advise should be done."
The proposition was at once adopted, and the committee chosen.Besides the chairman and Baldwin there were the vulture-facedsecretary, Harraway, Tiger Cormac, the brutal young assassin, Carter,the treasurer, and the brothers Willaby, fearless and desperate menwho would stick at nothing.
The usual revelry of the lodge was short and subdued: for there was acloud upon the men's spirits, and many there for the first time beganto see the cloud of avenging Law drifting up in that serene sky underwhich they had dwelt so long. The horrors they had dealt out toothers had been so much a part of their settled lives that thethought of retribution had become a remote one, and so seemed themore startling now that it came so closely upon them. They broke upearly and left their leaders to their council.
"Now, McMurdo!" said McGinty when they were alone. The seven men satfrozen in their seats.
"I said just now that I knew Birdy Edwards," McMurdo explained. "Ineed not tell you that he is not here under that name. He's a braveman, but not a crazy one. He passes under the name of Steve Wilson,and he is lodging at Hobson's Patch."
"How do you know this?"
"Because I fell into talk with him. I thought little of it at thetime, nor would have given it a second thought but for this letter;but now I'm sure it's the man. I met him on the cars when I went downthe line on Wednesday--a hard case if ever there was one. He said hewas a reporter. I believed it for the moment. Wanted to know all hecould about the Scowrers and what he called 'the outrages' for a NewYork paper. Asked me every kind of question so as to get something.You bet I was giving nothing away. 'I'd pay for it and pay well,'said he, 'if I could get some stuff that would suit my editor.' Isaid what I thought would please him best, and he handed me atwenty-dollar bill for my information. 'There's ten times that foryou,' said he, 'if you can find me all that I want.'"
"What did you tell him, then?"
"Any stuff I could make up."
"How do you know he wasn't a newspaper man?"
"I'll tell you. He got out at Hobson's Patch, and so did I. I chancedinto the telegraph bureau, and he was leaving it.
"'See here,' said the operator after he'd gone out, 'I guess weshould charge double rates for this.'--'I guess you should,' said I.He had filled the form with stuff that might have been Chinese, forall we could make of it. 'He fires a sheet of this off every day,'said the clerk. 'Yes,' said I; 'it's special news for his paper, andhe's scared that the others should tap it.' That was what theoperator thought and what I thought at the time; but I thinkdifferently now."
"By Gar! I believe you are right," said McGinty. "But what do youallow that we should do about it?"
"Why not go right down now and fix him?" someone suggested.
"Ay, the sooner the better."
"I'd start this next minute if I knew where we could find him," saidMcMurdo. "He's in Hobson's Patch; but I don't know the house. I'vegot a plan, though, if you'll only take my advice."
"Well, what is it?"
"I'll go to the Patch to-morrow morning. I'll find him through theoperator. He can locate him, I guess. Well, then I'll tell him thatI'm a Freeman myself. I'll offer him all the secrets of the lodge fora price. You bet he'll tumble to it. I'll tell him the papers are atmy house, and that it's as much as my life would be worth to let himcome while folk were about. He'll see that that's horse sense. Lethim come at ten o'clock at night, and he shall see everything. Thatwill fetch him sure."
"Well?"
"You can plan the rest for yourselves. Widow MacNamara's is a lonelyhouse. She's as true as steel and as deaf as a post. There's onlyScanlan and me in the house. If I get his promise--and I'll let youknow if I do--I'd have the whole seven of you come to me by nineo'clock. We'll get him in. If ever he gets out alive--well, he cantalk of Birdy Edwards's luck for the rest of his days!"
"There's going to be a vacancy at Pinkerton's or I'm mistaken. Leaveit at that, McMurdo. At nine to-morrow we'll be with you. You onceget the door shut behind him, and you can leave the rest with us."




     CHAPTER VII     The Trapping of Birdy Edwards

As McMurdo had said, the house in which he lived was a lonely one andvery well suited for such a crime as they had planned. It was on theextreme fringe of the town and stood well back from the road. In anyother case the conspirators would have simply called out their man,as they had many a time before, and emptied their pistols into hisbody; but in this instance it was very necessary to find out how muchhe knew, how he knew it, and what had been passed on to hisemployers.
It was possible that they were already too late and that the work hadbeen done. If that was indeed so, they could at least have theirrevenge upon the man who had done it. But they were hopeful thatnothing of great importance had yet come to the detective'sknowledge, as otherwise, they argued, he would not have troubled towrite down and forward such trivial information as McMurdo claimed tohave given him. However, all this they would learn from his own lips.Once in their power, they would find a way to make him speak. It wasnot the first time that they had handled an unwilling witness.
McMurdo went to Hobson's Patch as agreed. The police seemed to takeparticular interest in him that morning, and Captain Marvin--he whohad claimed the old acquaintance with him at Chicago--actuallyaddressed him as he waited at the station. McMurdo turned away andrefused to speak with him. He was back from his mission in theafternoon, and saw McGinty at the Union House.
"He is coming," he said.
"Good!" said McGinty. The giant was in his shirt sleeves, with chainsand seals gleaming athwart his ample waistcoat and a diamondtwinkling through the fringe of his bristling beard. Drink andpolitics had made the Boss a very rich as well as powerful man. Themore terrible, therefore, seemed that glimpse of the prison or thegallows which had risen before him the night before.
"Do you reckon he knows much?" he asked anxiously.
McMurdo shook his head gloomily. "He's been here some time--six weeksat the least. I guess he didn't come into these parts to look at theprospect. If he has been working among us all that time with therailroad money at his back, I should expect that he has got results,and that he has passed them on."
"There's not a weak man in the lodge," cried McGinty. "True as steel,every man of them. And yet, by the Lord! there is that skunk Morris.What about him? If any man gives us away, it would be he. I've a mindto send a couple of the boys round before evening to give him abeating up and see what they can get from him."
"Well, there would be no harm in that," McMurdo answered. "I won'tdeny that I have a liking for Morris and would be sorry to see himcome to harm. He has spoken to me once or twice over lodge matters,and though he may not see them the same as you or I, he never seemedthe sort that squeals. But still it is not for me to stand betweenhim and you."
"I'll fix the old devil!" said McGinty with an oath. "I've had my eyeon him this year past."
"Well, you know best about that," McMurdo answered. "But whatever youdo must be to-morrow; for we must lie low until the Pinkerton affairis settled up. We can't afford to set the police buzzing, to-day ofall days."
"True for you," said McGinty. "And we'll learn from Birdy Edwardshimself where he got his news if we have to cut his heart out first.Did he seem to scent a trap?"
McMurdo laughed. "I guess I took him on his weak point," he said. "Ifhe could get on a good trail of the Scowrers, he's ready to follow itinto hell. I took his money," McMurdo grinned as he produced a wad ofdollar notes, "and as much more when he has seen all my papers."
"What papers?"
"Well, there are no papers. But I filled him up about constitutionsand books of rules and forms of membership. He expects to get rightdown to the end of everything before he leaves."
"Faith, he's right there," said McGinty grimly. "Didn't he ask youwhy you didn't bring him the papers?"
"As if I would carry such things, and me a suspected man, and CaptainMarvin after speaking to me this very day at the depot!"
"Ay, I heard of that," said McGinty. "I guess the heavy end of thisbusiness is coming on to you. We could put him down an old shaft whenwe've done with him; but however we work it we can't get past the manliving at Hobson's Patch and you being there to-day."
McMurdo shrugged his shoulders. "If we handle it right, they cannever prove the killing," said he. "No one can see him come to thehouse after dark, and I'll lay to it that no one will see him go. Nowsee here, Councillor, I'll show you my plan and I'll ask you to fitthe others into it. You will all come in good time. Very well. Hecomes at ten. He is to tap three times, and me to open the door forhim. Then I'll get behind him and shut it. He's our man then."
"That's all easy and plain."
"Yes; but the next step wants considering. He's a hard proposition.He's heavily armed. I've fooled him proper, and yet he is likely tobe on his guard. Suppose I show him right into a room with seven menin it where he expected to find me alone. There is going to beshooting, and somebody is going to be hurt."
"That's so."
"And the noise is going to bring every damned copper in the townshipon top of it."
"I guess you are right."
"This is how I should work it. You will all be in the big room--sameas you saw when you had a chat with me. I'll open the door for him,show him into the parlour beside the door, and leave him there whileI get the papers. That will give me the chance of telling you howthings are shaping. Then I will go back to him with some fakedpapers. As he is reading them I will jump for him and get my grip onhis pistol arm. You'll hear me call and in you will rush. The quickerthe better; for he is as strong a man as I, and I may have more thanI can manage. But I allow that I can hold him till you come."
"It's a good plan," said McGinty. "The lodge will owe you a debt forthis. I guess when I move out of the chair I can put a name to theman that's coming after me."
"Sure, Councillor, I am little more than a recruit," said McMurdo;but his face showed what he thought of the great man's compliment.
When he had returned home he made his own preparations for the grimevening in front of him. First he cleaned, oiled, and loaded hisSmith & Wesson revolver. Then he surveyed the room in which thedetective was to be trapped. It was a large apartment, with a longdeal table in the centre, and the big stove at one side. At each ofthe other sides were windows. There were no shutters on these: onlylight curtains which drew across. McMurdo examined these attentively.No doubt it must have struck him that the apartment was very exposedfor so secret a meeting. Yet its distance from the road made it ofless consequence. Finally he discussed the matter with his fellowlodger. Scanlan, though a Scowrer, was an inoffensive little man whowas too weak to stand against the opinion of his comrades, but wassecretly horrified by the deeds of blood at which he had sometimesbeen forced to assist. McMurdo told him shortly what was intended.
"And if I were you, Mike Scanlan, I would take a night off and keepclear of it. There will be bloody work here before morning."
"Well, indeed then, Mac," Scanlan answered. "It's not the will butthe nerve that is wanting in me. When I saw Manager Dunn go down atthe colliery yonder it was just more than I could stand. I'm not madefor it, same as you or McGinty. If the lodge will think none theworse of me, I'll just do as you advise and leave you to yourselvesfor the evening."
The men came in good time as arranged. They were outwardlyrespectable citizens, well clad and cleanly; but a judge of faceswould have read little hope for Birdy Edwards in those hard mouthsand remorseless eyes. There was not a man in the room whose hands hadnot been reddened a dozen times before. They were as hardened tohuman murder as a butcher to sheep.
Foremost, of course, both in appearance and in guilt, was theformidable Boss. Harraway, the secretary, was a lean, bitter man witha long, scraggy neck and nervous, jerky limbs, a man of incorruptiblefidelity where the finances of the order were concerned, and with nonotion of justice or honesty to anyone beyond. The treasurer, Carter,was a middle-aged man, with an impassive, rather sulky expression,and a yellow parchment skin. He was a capable organizer, and theactual details of nearly every outrage had sprung from his plottingbrain. The two Willabys were men of action, tall, lithe young fellowswith determined faces, while their companion, Tiger Cormac, a heavy,dark youth, was feared even by his own comrades for the ferocity ofhis disposition. These were the men who assembled that night underthe roof of McMurdo for the killing of the Pinkerton detective.
Their host had placed whisky upon the table, and they had hastened toprime themselves for the work before them. Baldwin and Cormac werealready half-drunk, and the liquor had brought out all theirferocity. Cormac placed his hands on the stove for an instant--it hadbeen lighted, for the nights were still cold.
"That will do," said he, with an oath.
"Ay," said Baldwin, catching his meaning. "If he is strapped to that,we will have the truth out of him."
"We'll have the truth out of him, never fear," said McMurdo. He hadnerves of steel, this man; for though the whole weight of the affairwas on him his manner was as cool and unconcerned as ever. The othersmarked it and applauded.
"You are the one to handle him," said the Boss approvingly. "Not awarning will he get till your hand is on his throat. It's a pitythere are no shutters to your windows."
McMurdo went from one to the other and drew the curtains tighter."Sure no one can spy upon us now. It's close upon the hour."
"Maybe he won't come. Maybe he'll get a sniff of danger," said thesecretary.
"He'll come, never fear," McMurdo answered. "He is as eager to comeas you can be to see him. Hark to that!"
They all sat like wax figures, some with their glasses arrestedhalfway to their lips. Three loud knocks had sounded at the door.
"Hush!" McMurdo raised his hand in caution. An exulting glance wentround the circle, and hands were laid upon hidden weapons.
"Not a sound, for your lives!" McMurdo whispered, as he went from theroom, closing the door carefully behind him.
With strained ears the murderers waited. They counted the steps oftheir comrade down the passage. Then they heard him open the outerdoor. There were a few words as of greeting. Then they were aware ofa strange step inside and of an unfamiliar voice. An instant latercame the slam of the door and the turning of the key in the lock.Their prey was safe within the trap. Tiger Cormac laughed horribly,and Boss McGinty clapped his great hand across his mouth.
"Be quiet, you fool!" he whispered. "You'll be the undoing of usyet!"
There was a mutter of conversation from the next room. It seemedinterminable. Then the door opened, and McMurdo appeared, his fingerupon his lip.
He came to the end of the table and looked round at them. A subtlechange had come over him. His manner was as of one who has great workto do. His face had set into granite firmness. His eyes shone with afierce excitement behind his spectacles. He had become a visibleleader of men. They stared at him with eager interest; but he saidnothing. Still with the same singular gaze he looked from man to man.
"Well!" cried Boss McGinty at last. "Is he here? Is Birdy Edwardshere?"
"Yes," McMurdo answered slowly. "Birdy Edwards is here. I am BirdyEdwards!"
There were ten seconds after that brief speech during which the roommight have been empty, so profound was the silence. The hissing of akettle upon the stove rose sharp and strident to the ear. Seven whitefaces, all turned upward to this man who dominated them, were setmotionless with utter terror. Then, with a sudden shivering of glass,a bristle of glistening rifle barrels broke through each window,while the curtains were torn from their hangings.
At the sight Boss McGinty gave the roar of a wounded bear and plungedfor the half-opened door. A levelled revolver met him there with thestern blue eyes of Captain Marvin of the Mine Police gleaming behindthe sights. The Boss recoiled and fell back into his chair.
"You're safer there, Councillor," said the man whom they had known asMcMurdo. "And you, Baldwin, if you don't take your hand off yourpistol, you'll cheat the hangman yet. Pull it out, or by the Lordthat made me--There, that will do. There are forty armed men roundthis house, and you can figure it out for yourself what chance youhave. Take their pistols, Marvin!"
There was no possible resistance under the menace of those rifles.The men were disarmed. Sulky, sheepish, and amazed, they still satround the table.
"I'd like to say a word to you before we separate," said the man whohad trapped them. "I guess we may not meet again until you see me onthe stand in the courthouse. I'll give you something to think overbetween now and then. You know me now for what I am. At last I canput my cards on the table. I am Birdy Edwards of Pinkerton's. I waschosen to break up your gang. I had a hard and dangerous game toplay. Not a soul, not one soul, not my nearest and dearest, knew thatI was playing it. Only Captain Marvin here and my employers knewthat. But it's over to-night, thank God, and I am the winner!"
The seven pale, rigid faces looked up at him. There was unappeasablehatred in their eyes. He read the relentless threat.
"Maybe you think that the game is not over yet. Well, I take mychance of that. Anyhow, some of you will take no further hand, andthere are sixty more besides yourselves that will see a jail thisnight. I'll tell you this, that when I was put upon this job I neverbelieved there was such a society as yours. I thought it was papertalk, and that I would prove it so. They told me it was to do withthe Freemen; so I went to Chicago and was made one. Then I was surerthan ever that it was just paper talk; for I found no harm in thesociety, but a deal of good.
"Still, I had to carry out my job, and I came to the coal valleys.When I reached this place I learned that I was wrong and that itwasn't a dime novel after all. So I stayed to look after it. I neverkilled a man in Chicago. I never minted a dollar in my life. Those Igave you were as good as any others; but I never spent money better.But I knew the way into your good wishes and so I pretended to youthat the law was after me. It all worked just as I thought.
"So I joined your infernal lodge, and I took my share in yourcouncils. Maybe they will say that I was as bad as you. They can saywhat they like, so long as I get you. But what is the truth? Thenight I joined you beat up old man Stanger. I could not warn him, forthere was no time; but I held your hand, Baldwin, when you would havekilled him. If ever I have suggested things, so as to keep my placeamong you, they were things which I knew I could prevent. I could notsave Dunn and Menzies, for I did not know enough; but I will see thattheir murderers are hanged. I gave Chester Wilcox warning, so thatwhen I blew his house in he and his folk were in hiding. There wasmany a crime that I could not stop; but if you look back and thinkhow often your man came home the other road, or was down in town whenyou went for him, or stayed indoors when you thought he would comeout, you'll see my work."
"You blasted traitor!" hissed McGinty through his closed teeth.
"Ay, John McGinty, you may call me that if it eases your smart. Youand your like have been the enemy of God and man in these parts. Ittook a man to get between you and the poor devils of men and womenthat you held under your grip. There was just one way of doing it,and I did it. You call me a traitor; but I guess there's many athousand will call me a deliverer that went down into hell to savethem. I've had three months of it. I wouldn't have three such monthsagain if they let me loose in the treasury at Washington for it. Ihad to stay till I had it all, every man and every secret right herein this hand. I'd have waited a little longer if it hadn't come to myknowledge that my secret was coming out. A letter had come into thetown that would have set you wise to it all. Then I had to act andact quickly.
"I've nothing more to say to you, except that when my time comes I'lldie the easier when I think of the work I have done in this valley.Now, Marvin, I'll keep you no more. Take them in and get it over."
There is little more to tell. Scanlan had been given a sealed note tobe left at the address of Miss Ettie Shafter, a mission which he hadaccepted with a wink and a knowing smile. In the early hours of themorning a beautiful woman and a much muffled man boarded a specialtrain which had been sent by the railroad company, and made a swift,unbroken journey out of the land of danger. It was the last time thatever either Ettie or her lover set foot in the Valley of Fear. Tendays later they were married in Chicago, with old Jacob Shafter aswitness of the wedding.
The trial of the Scowrers was held far from the place where theiradherents might have terrified the guardians of the law. In vain theystruggled. In vain the money of the lodge--money squeezed byblackmail out of the whole countryside--was spent like water in theattempt to save them. That cold, clear, unimpassioned statement fromone who knew every detail of their lives, their organization, andtheir crimes was unshaken by all the wiles of their defenders. Atlast after so many years they were broken and scattered. The cloudwas lifted forever from the valley.
McGinty met his fate upon the scaffold, cringing and whining when thelast hour came. Eight of his chief followers shared his fate.Fifty-odd had various degrees of imprisonment. The work of BirdyEdwards was complete.
And yet, as he had guessed, the game was not over yet. There wasanother hand to be played, and yet another and another. Ted Baldwin,for one, had escaped the scaffold; so had the Willabys; so hadseveral others of the fiercest spirits of the gang. For ten yearsthey were out of the world, and then came a day when they were freeonce more--a day which Edwards, who knew his men, was very sure wouldbe an end of his life of peace. They had sworn an oath on all thatthey thought holy to have his blood as a vengeance for theircomrades. And well they strove to keep their vow!
From Chicago he was chased, after two attempts so near success thatit was sure that the third would get him. From Chicago he went undera changed name to California, and it was there that the light wentfor a time out of his life when Ettie Edwards died. Once again he wasnearly killed, and once again under the name of Douglas he worked ina lonely canyon, where with an English partner named Barker heamassed a fortune. At last there came a warning to him that thebloodhounds were on his track once more, and he cleared--only just intime--for England. And thence came the John Douglas who for a secondtime married a worthy mate, and lived for five years as a Sussexcounty gentleman, a life which ended with the strange happenings ofwhich we have heard.




     CHAPTER VIII     Epilogue

The police trial had passed, in which the case of John Douglas wasreferred to a higher court. So had the Quarter Sessions, at which hewas acquitted as having acted in self-defense.
"Get him out of England at any cost," wrote Holmes to the wife."There are forces here which may be more dangerous than those he hasescaped. There is no safety for your husband in England."
Two months had gone by, and the case had to some extent passed fromour minds. Then one morning there came an enigmatic note slipped intoour letter box. "Dear me, Mr. Holmes. Dear me!" said this singularepistle. There was neither superscription nor signature. I laughed atthe quaint message; but Holmes showed unwonted seriousness.
"Deviltry, Watson!" he remarked, and sat long with a clouded brow.
Late last night Mrs. Hudson, our landlady, brought up a message thata gentleman wished to see Holmes, and that the matter was of theutmost importance. Close at the heels of his messenger came CecilBarker, our friend of the moated Manor House. His face was drawn andhaggard.
"I've had bad news--terrible news, Mr. Holmes," said he.
"I feared as much," said Holmes.
"You have not had a cable, have you?"
"I have had a note from someone who has."
"It's poor Douglas. They tell me his name is Edwards; but he willalways be Jack Douglas of Benito Canyon to me. I told you that theystarted together for South Africa in the Palmyra three weeks ago."
"Exactly."
"The ship reached Cape Town last night. I received this cable fromMrs. Douglas this morning:--
"Jack has been lost overboard in gale off St. Helena. No one knowshow accident occurred."Ivy Douglas."
"Ha! It came like that, did it?" said Holmes, thoughtfully. "Well,I've no doubt it was well stage-managed."
"You mean that you think there was no accident?"
"None in the world."
"He was murdered?"
"Surely!"
"So I think also. These infernal Scowrers, this cursed vindictivenest of criminals--"
"No, no, my good sir," said Holmes. "There is a master hand here. Itis no case of sawed-off shot-guns and clumsy six-shooters. You cantell an old master by the sweep of his brush. I can tell a Moriartywhen I see one. This crime is from London, not from America."
"But for what motive?"
"Because it is done by a man who cannot afford to fail--one whosewhole unique position depends upon the fact that all he does mustsucceed. A great brain and a huge organization have been turned tothe extinction of one man. It is crushing the nut with the hammer--anabsurd extravagance of energy--but the nut is very effectuallycrushed all the same."
"How came this man to have anything to do with it?"
"I can only say that the first word that ever came to us of thebusiness was from one of his lieutenants. These Americans were welladvised. Having an English job to do, they took into partnership, asany foreign criminal could do, this great consultant in crime. Fromthat moment their man was doomed. At first he would content himselfby using his machinery in order to find their victim. Then he wouldindicate how the matter might be treated. Finally, when he read inthe reports of the failure of this agent, he would step in himselfwith a master touch. You heard me warn this man at Birlstone ManorHouse that the coming danger was greater than the past. Was I right?"
Barker beat his head with his clenched fist in his impotent anger.
"Do you tell me that we have to sit down under this? Do you say thatno one can ever get level with this king-devil?"
"No, I don't say that," said Holmes, and his eyes seemed to belooking far into the future. "I don't say that he can't be beat. Butyou must give me time--you must give me time!"
We all sat in silence for some minutes, while those fateful eyesstill strained to pierce the veil.





                             HIS LAST BOW




                                PREFACE
The friends of Mr. Sherlock Holmes will be glad to learn that he isstill alive and well, though somewhat crippled by occasional attacksof rheumatism. He has, for many years, lived in a small farm upon thedowns five miles from Eastbourne, where his time is divided betweenphilosophy and agriculture. During this period of rest he has refusedthe most princely offers to take up various cases, having determinedthat his retirement was a permanent one. The approach of the Germanwar caused him, however, to lay his remarkable combination ofintellectual and practical activity at the disposal of thegovernment, with historical results which are recounted in His LastBow. Several previous experiences which have lain long in myportfolio have been added to His Last Bow so as to complete thevolume.

        John H. Watson, M. D.





                    THE ADVENTURE OF WISTERIA LODGE




                           Table of contents   The Singular Experience of Mr. John Scott Eccles   The Tiger of San Pedro














     CHAPTER I     The Singular Experience of Mr. John Scott Eccles

I find it recorded in my notebook that it was a bleak and windy daytowards the end of March in the year 1892.  Holmes had received atelegram while we sat at our lunch, and he had scribbled a reply.  Hemade no remark, but the matter remained in his thoughts, for he stoodin front of the fire afterwards with a thoughtful face, smoking hispipe, and casting an occasional glance at the message. Suddenly heturned upon me with a mischievous twinkle in his eyes.
"I suppose, Watson, we must look upon you as a man of letters," saidhe. "How do you define the word 'grotesque'?"
"Strange--remarkable," I suggested.
He shook his head at my definition.
"There is surely something more than that," said he; "some underlyingsuggestion of the tragic and the terrible.  If you cast your mindback to some of those narratives with which you have afflicted along-suffering public, you will recognize how often the grotesque hasdeepened into the criminal.  Think of that little affair of thered-headed men.  That was grotesque enough in the outset, and yet itended in a desperate attempt at robbery.  Or, again, there was thatmost grotesque affair of the five orange pips, which let straight toa murderous conspiracy. The word puts me on the alert."
"Have you it there?" I asked.
He read the telegram aloud.
"Have just had most incredible and grotesque experience. May Iconsult you?"Scott Eccles,"Post Office, Charing Cross."
"Man or woman?" I asked.
"Oh, man, of course. No woman would ever send a reply-paid telegram.She would have come."
"Will you see him?"
"My dear Watson, you know how bored I have been since we locked upColonel Carruthers. My mind is like a racing engine, tearing itselfto pieces because it is not connected up with the work for which itwas built. Life is commonplace, the papers are sterile; audacity andromance seem to have passed forever from the criminal world. Can youask me, then, whether I am ready to look into any new problem,however trivial it may prove? But here, unless I am mistaken, is ourclient."
A measured step was heard upon the stairs, and a moment later astout, tall, gray-whiskered and solemnly respectable person wasushered into the room.  His life history was written in his heavyfeatures and pompous manner.  From his spats to his gold-rimmedspectacles he was a Conservative, a churchman, a good citizen,orthodox and conventional to the last degree. But some amazingexperience had disturbed his native composure and left its traces inhis bristling hair, his flushed, angry cheeks, and his flurried,excited manner. He plunged instantly into his business.
"I have had a most singular and unpleasant experience, Mr. Holmes,"said he. "Never in my life have I been placed in such a situation. Itis most improper--most outrageous. I must insist upon someexplanation." He swelled and puffed in his anger.
"Pray sit down, Mr. Scott Eccles," said Holmes in a soothing voice."May I ask, in the first place, why you came to me at all?"
"Well, sir, it did not appear to be a matter which concerned thepolice, and yet, when you have heard the facts, you must admit that Icould not leave it where it was. Private detectives are a class withwhom I have absolutely no sympathy, but none the less, having heardyour name--"
"Quite so.  But, in the second place, why did you not come at once?"
"What do you mean?"
Holmes glanced at his watch.
"It is a quarter-past two," he said. "Your telegram was dispatchedabout one. But no one can glance at your toilet and attire withoutseeing that your disturbance dates from the moment of your waking."
Our client smoothed down his unbrushed hair and felt his unshavenchin.
"You are right, Mr. Holmes. I never gave a thought to my toilet. Iwas only too glad to get out of such a house. But I have been runninground making inquiries before I came to you. I went to the houseagents, you know, and they said that Mr. Garcia's rent was paid upall right and that everything was in order at Wisteria Lodge."
"Come, come, sir," said Holmes, laughing. "You are like my friend,Dr. Watson, who has a bad habit of telling his stories wrong endforemost. Please arrange your thoughts and let me know, in their duesequence, exactly what those events are which have sent you outunbrushed and unkempt, with dress boots and waistcoat buttoned awry,in search of advice and assistance."
Our client looked down with a rueful face at his own unconventionalappearance.
"I'm sure it must look very bad, Mr. Holmes, and I am not aware thatin my whole life such a thing has ever happened before. But will tellyou the whole queer business, and when I have done so you will admit,I am sure, that there has been enough to excuse me."
But his narrative was nipped in the bud. There was a bustle outside,and Mrs. Hudson opened the door to usher in two robust andofficial-looking individuals, one of whom was well known to us asInspector Gregson of Scotland Yard, an energetic, gallant, and,within his limitations, a capable officer. He shook hands with Holmesand introduced his comrade as Inspector Baynes, of the SurreyConstabulary.
"We are hunting together, Mr. Holmes, and our trail lay in thisdirection." He turned his bulldog eyes upon our visitor. "Are you Mr.John Scott Eccles, of Popham House, Lee?"
"I am."
"We have been following you about all the morning."
"You traced him through the telegram, no doubt," said Holmes. 
"Exactly, Mr. Holmes. We picked up the scent at Charing CrossPost-Office and came on here."
"But why do you follow me? What do you want?"
"We wish a statement, Mr. Scott Eccles, as to the events which let upto the death last night of Mr. Aloysius Garcia, of Wisteria Lodge,near Esher."
Our client had sat up with staring eyes and every tinge of colourstruck from his astonished face.
"Dead?  Did you say he was dead?"
"Yes, sir, he is dead."
"But how?  An accident?"
"Murder, if ever there was one upon earth."
"Good God! This is awful! You don't mean--you don't mean that I amsuspected?"
"A letter of yours was found in the dead man's pocket, and we know byit that you had planned to pass last night at his house."
"So I did."
"Oh, you did, did you?"
Out came the official notebook.
"Wait a bit, Gregson," said Sherlock Holmes. "All you desire is aplain statement, is it not?"
"And it is my duty to warn Mr. Scott Eccles that it may be usedagainst him."
"Mr. Eccles was going to tell us about it when you entered the room.I think, Watson, a brandy and soda would do him no harm. Now, sir, Isuggest that you take no notice of this addition to your audience,and that you proceed with your narrative exactly as you would havedone had you never been interrupted."
Our visitor had gulped off the brandy and the colour had returned tohis face.  With a dubious glance at the inspector's notebook, heplunged at once into his extraordinary statement.
"I am a bachelor," said he, "and being of a sociable turn I cultivatea large number of friends. Among these are the family of a retiredbrewer called Melville, living at Abermarle Mansion, Kensington. Itwas at his table that I met some weeks ago a young fellow namedGarcia. He was, I understood, of Spanish descent and connected insome way with the embassy. He spoke perfect English, was pleasing inhis manners, and as good-looking a man as ever I saw in my life.
"In some way we struck up quite a friendship, this young fellow andI. He seemed to take a fancy to me from the first, and within twodays of our meeting he came to see me at Lee. One thing led toanother, and it ended in his inviting me out to spend a few days athis house, Wisteria Lodge, between Esher and Oxshott. Yesterdayevening I went to Esher to fulfil this engagement.
"He had described his household to me before I went there. He livedwith a faithful servant, a countryman of his own, who looked afterall his needs. This fellow could speak English and did hishousekeeping for him. Then there was a wonderful cook, he said, ahalf-breed whom he had picked up in his travels, who could serve anexcellent dinner. I remember that he remarked what a queer householdit was to find in the heart of Surrey, and that I agreed with him,though it has proved a good deal queerer than I thought.
"I drove to the place--about two miles on the south side of Esher.The house was a fair-sized one, standing back from the road, with acurving drive which was banked with high evergreen shrubs. It was anold, tumbledown building in a crazy state of disrepair. When the trappulled up on the grass-grown drive in front of the blotched andweather-stained door, I had doubts as to my wisdom in visiting a manwhom I knew so slightly. He opened the door himself, however, andgreeted me with a great show of cordiality. I was handed over to themanservant, a melancholy, swarthy individual, who led the way, my bagin his hand, to my bedroom. The whole place was depressing. Ourdinner was tte--tte, and though my host did his best to beentertaining, his thoughts seemed to continually wander, and hetalked so vaguely and wildly that I could hardly understand him. Hecontinually drummed his fingers on the table, gnawed his nails, andgave other signs of nervous impatience. The dinner itself was neitherwell served nor well cooked, and the gloomy presence of the taciturnservant did not help to enliven us. I can assure you that many timesin the course of the evening I wished that I could invent some excusewhich would take me back to Lee.
"One thing comes back to my memory which may have a bearing upon thebusiness that you two gentlemen are investigating. I thought nothingof it at the time. Near the end of dinner a note was handed in by theservant. I noticed that after my host had read it he seemed even moredistrait and strange than before. He gave up all pretence atconversation and sat, smoking endless cigarettes, lost in his ownthoughts, but he made no remark as to the contents. About eleven Iwas glad to go to bed. Some time later Garcia looked in at mydoor--the room was dark at the time--and asked me if I had rung. Isaid that I had not. He apologized for having disturbed me so late,saying that it was nearly one o'clock. I dropped off after this andslept soundly all night.
"And now I come to the amazing part of my tale. When I woke it wasbroad daylight. I glanced at my watch, and the time was nearly nine.I had particularly asked to be called at eight, so I was very muchastonished at this forgetfulness. I sprang up and rang for theservant. There was no response. I rang again and again, with the sameresult. Then I came to the conclusion that the bell was out of order.I huddled on my clothes and hurried downstairs in an exceedingly badtemper to order some hot water. You can imagine my surprise when Ifound that there was no one there. I shouted in the hall. There wasno answer. Then I ran from room to room. All were deserted. My hosthad shown me which was his bedroom the night before, so I knocked atthe door. No reply. I turned the handle and walked in. The room wasempty, and the bed had never been slept in. He had gone with therest. The foreign host, the foreign footman, the foreign cook, allhad vanished in the night! That was the end of my visit to WisteriaLodge."
Sherlock Holmes was rubbing his hands and chuckling as he added thisbizarre incident to his collection of strange episodes.
"Your experience is, so far as I know, perfectly unique," said he."May I ask, sir, what you did then?"
"I was furious. My first idea was that I had been the victim of someabsurd practical joke. I packed my things, banged the hall doorbehind me, and set off for Esher, with my bag in my hand. I called atAllan Brothers', the chief land agents in the village, and found thatit was from this firm that the villa had been rented. It struck methat the whole proceeding could hardly be for the purpose of making afool of me, and that the main objet must be to get out of the rent.It is late in March, so quarter-day is at hand. But this theory wouldnot work. The agent was obliged to me for my warning, but told methat the rent had been paid in advance. Then I made my way to townand called at the Spanish embassy. The man was unknown there. Afterthis I went to see Melville, at whose house I had first met Garcia,but I found that he really knew rather less about him than I did.Finally when I got your reply to my wire I came out to you, since Igather that you are a person who gives advice in difficult cases. Butnow, Mr. Inspector, I understand, from what you said when you enteredthe room, that you can carry the story on, and that some tragedy hadoccurred. I can assure you that every word I have said is the truth,and that, outside of what I have told you, I know absolutely nothingabout the fate of this man. My only desire is to help the law inevery possible way."
"I am sure of it, Mr. Scott Eccles--I am sure of it," said InspectorGregson in a very amiable tone. "I am bound to say that everythingwhich you have said agrees very closely with the facts as they havecome to our notice. For example, there was that note which arrivedduring dinner. Did you chance to observe what became of it?"
"Yes, I did. Garcia rolled it up and threw it into the fire."
"What do you say to that, Mr. Baynes?"
The country detective was a stout, puffy, red man, whose face wasonly redeemed from grossness by two extraordinarily bright eyes,almost hidden behind the heavy creases of cheek and brow. With a slowsmile he drew a folded and discoloured scrap of paper from hispocket.
"It was a dog-grate, Mr. Holmes, and he overpitched it. I picked thisout unburned from the back of it."
Holmes smiled his appreciation.
"You must have examined the house very carefully to find a singlepellet of paper."
"I did, Mr. Holmes. It's my way. Shall I read it, Mr. Gregson?"
The Londoner nodded.
"The note is written upon ordinary cream-laid paper withoutwatermark. It is a quarter-sheet. The paper is cut off in two snipswith a short-bladed scissors. It has been folded over three times andsealed with purple wax, put on hurriedly and pressed down with someflat oval object. It is addressed to Mr. Garcia, Wisteria Lodge. Itsays:
"Our own colours, green and white. Green open, white shut. Mainstair, first corridor, seventh right, green baize. Godspeed.D.
"It is a woman's writing, done with a sharp-pointed pen, but theaddress is either done with another pen or by someone else. It isthicker and bolder, as you see."
"A very remarkable note," said Holmes, glancing it over. "I mustcompliment you, Mr. Baynes, upon your attention to detail in yourexamination of it. A few trifling points might perhaps be added. Theoval seal is undoubtedly a plain sleeve-link--what else is of such ashape? The scissors were bent nail scissors. Short as the two snipsare, you can distinctly see the same slight curve in each."
The country detective chuckled.
"I thought I had squeezed all the juice out of it, but I see therewas a little over," he said. "I'm bound to say that I make nothing ofthe note except that there was something on hand, and that a woman,as usual, was at the bottom of it."
Mr. Scott Eccles had fidgeted in his seat during this conversation.
"I am glad you found the note, since it corroborates my story," saidhe. "But I beg to point out that I have not yet heard what hashappened to Mr. Garcia, nor what has become of his household."
"As to Garcia," said Gregson, "that is easily answered. He was founddead this morning upon Oxshott Common, nearly a mile from his home.His head had been smashed to pulp by heavy blows of a sandbag or somesuch instrument, which had crushed rather than wounded. It is alonely corner, and there is no house within a quarter of a mile ofthe spot. He had apparently been struck down first from behind, buthis assailant had gone on beating him long after he was dead. It wasa most furious assault. There are no footsteps nor any clue to thecriminals."
"Robbed?"
"No, there was no attempt at robbery."
"This is very painful--very painful and terrible," said Mr. ScottEccles in a querulous voice, "but it is really uncommonly hard on me.I had nothing to do with my host going off upon a nocturnal excursionand meeting so sad an end. How do I come to be mixed up with thecase?"
"Very simply, sir," Inspector Baynes answered. "The only documentfound in the pocket of the deceased was a letter from you saying thatyou would be with him on the night of his death. It was the envelopeof this letter which gave us the dead man's name and address. It wasafter nine this morning when we reached his house and found neitheryou nor anyone else inside it. I wired to Mr. Gregson to run you downin London while I examined Wisteria Lodge. Then I came into town,joined Mr. Gregson, and here we are."
"I think now," said Gregson, rising, "we had best put this matterinto an official shape. You will come round with us to the station,Mr. Scott Eccles, and let us have your statement in writing."
"Certainly, I will come at once. But I retain your services, Mr.Holmes. I desire you to spare no expense and no pains to get at thetruth."
My friend turned to the country inspector.
"I suppose that you have no objection to my collaborating with you,Mr. Baynes?"
"Highly honoured, sir, I am sure."
"You appear to have been very prompt and businesslike in all that youhave done. Was there any clue, may I ask, as to the exact hour thatthe man met his death?"
"He had been there since one o'clock. There was rain about that time,and his death had certainly been before the rain."
"But that is perfectly impossible, Mr. Baynes," cried our client."His voice is unmistakable. I could swear to it that it was he whoaddressed me in my bedroom at that very hour."
"Remarkable, but by no means impossible," said Holmes, smiling.
"You have a clue?" asked Gregson.
"On the face of it the case is not a very complex one, though itcertainly presents some novel and interesting features. A furtherknowledge of facts is necessary before I would venture to give afinal and definite opinion. By the way, Mr. Baynes, did you findanything remarkable besides this note in your examination of thehouse?"
The detective looked at my friend in a singular way.
"There were," said he, "one or two very remarkable things. Perhapswhen I have finished at the police-station you would care to come outand give me your opinion of them."
"In am entirely at your service," said Sherlock Holmes, ringing thebell. "You will show these gentlemen out, Mrs. Hudson, and kindlysend the boy with this telegram. He is to pay a five-shilling reply."
We sat for some time in silence after our visitors had left. Holmessmoked hard, with his browns drawn down over his keen eyes, and hishead thrust forward in the eager way characteristic of the man.
"Well, Watson," he asked, turning suddenly upon me, "what do you makeof it?"
"I can make nothing of this mystification of Scott Eccles."
"But the crime?"
"Well, taken with the disappearance of the man's companions, I shouldsay that they were in some way concerned in the murder and had fledfrom justice."
"That is certainly a possible point of view. On the face of it youmust admit, however, that it is very strange that his two servantsshould have been in a conspiracy against him and should have attackedhim on the one night when he had a guest. They had him alone at theirmercy every other night in the week."
"Then why did they fly?"
"Quite so. Why did they fly? There is a big fact. Another big fact isthe remarkable experience of our client, Scott Eccles. Now, my dearWatson, is it beyond the limits of human ingenuity to furnish anexplanation which would cover both of these big facts? If it were onewhich would also admit of the mysterious note with its very curiousphraseology, why, then it would be worth accepting as a temporaryhypothesis. If the fresh facts which come to our knowledge all fitthemselves into the scheme, then our hypothesis may gradually becomea solution."
"But what is our hypothesis?"
Holmes leaned back in his chair with half-closed eyes.
"You must admit, my dear Watson, that the idea of a joke isimpossible. There were grave events afoot, as the sequel showed, andthe coaxing of Scott Eccles to Wisteria Lodge had some connectionwith them."
"But what possible connection?"
"Let us take it link by link. There is, on the face of it, somethingunnatural about this strange and sudden friendship between the youngSpaniard and Scott Eccles. It was the former who forced the pace. Hecalled upon Eccles at the other end of London on the very day afterhe first met him, and he kept in close touch with him until he gothim down to Esher. Now, what did he want with Eccles? What couldEccles supply? I see no charm in the man. He is not particularyintelligent--not a man likely to be congenial to a quick-wittedLatin. Why, then, was he picked out from all the other people whomGarcia met as particularly suited to his purpose? Has he any oneoutstanding quality? I say that he has. He is the very type ofconventional British respectability, and the very man as a witness toimpress another Briton. You saw yourself how neither of theinspectors dreamed of questioning his statement, extraordinary as itwas."
"But what was he to witness?"
"Nothing, as things turned out, but everything had they gone anotherway. That is how I read the matter."
"I see, he might have proved an alibi."
"Exactly, my dear Watson; he might have proved an alibi. We willsuppose, for argument's sake, that the household of Wisteria Lodgeare confederates in some design. The attempt, whatever it may be, isto come off, we will say, before one o'clock. By some juggling of theclocks it is quite possible that they may have got Scott Eccles tobed earlier than he thought, but in any case it is likely that whenGarcia went out of his way to tell him that it was one it was reallynot more than twelve. If Garcia could do whatever he had to do and beback by the hour mentioned he had evidently a powerful reply to anyaccusation. Here was this irreproachable Englishman ready to swear inany court of law that the accused was in the house all the time. Itwas an insurance against the worst."
"Yes, yes, I see that. But how about the disappearance of theothers?"
"I have not all my facts yet, but I do not think there are anyinsuperable difficulties. Still, it is an error to argue in front ofyour data. You find yourself insensibly twisting them round to fityour theories."
"And the message?"
"How did it run? 'Our own colours, green and white.' Sounds likeracing. 'Green open, white shut.' That is clearly a signal. 'Mainstair, first corridor, seventh right, green baize.' This is anassignation. We may find a jealous husband at the bottom of it all.It was clearly a dangerous quest. She would not have said 'Godspeed'had it not been so. 'D'--that should be a guide."
"The man was a Spaniard. I suggest that 'D' stands for Dolores, acommon female name in Spain."
"Good, Watson, very good--but quite inadmissable. A Spaniard wouldwrite to a Spaniard in Spanish. The writer of this note is certainlyEnglish. Well, we can only possess our soul in patience until thisexcellent inspector come back for us. Meanwhile we can thank ourlucky fate which has rescued us for a few short hours from theinsufferable fatigues of idleness."
An answer had arrived to Holmes's telegram before our Surrey officerhad returned. Holmes read it and was about to place it in hisnotebook when he caught a glimpse of my expectant face. He tossed itacross with a laugh.
"We are moving in exalted circles," said he.
The telegram was a list of names and addresses:
Lord Harringby, The Dingle; Sir George Ffolliott, Oxshott Towers; Mr.Hynes Hynes, J.P., Purdley Place; Mr. James Baker Williams, FortonOld Hall; Mr. Henderson, High Gable; Rev. Joshua Stone, NetherWalsling."This is a very obvious way of limiting our field of operations,"said Holmes. "No doubt Baynes, with his methodical mind, has alreadyadopted some similar plan."
"I don't quite understand."
"Well, my dear fellow, we have already arrived at the conclusion thatthe massage received by Garcia at dinner was an appointment or anassignation. Now, if the obvious reading of it is correct, and inorder to keep the tryst one has to ascend a main stair and seek theseventh door in a corridor, it is perfectly clear that the house is avery large one. It is equally certain that this house cannot be morethan a mile or two from Oxshott, since Garcia was walking in thatdirection and hoped, according to my reading of the facts, to be backin Wisteria Lodge in time to avail himself of an alibi, which wouldonly be valid up to one o'clock. As the number of large houses closeto Oxshott must be limited, I adopted the obvious method of sendingto the agents mentioned by Scott Eccles and obtaining a list of them.Here they are in this telegram, and the other end of our tangledskein must lie among them."
It was nearly six o'clock before we found ourselves in the prettySurrey village of Esher, with Inspector Baynes as our companion.
Holmes and I had taken things for the night, and found comfortablequarters at the Bull. Finally we set out in the company of thedetective on our visit to Wisteria Lodge. It was a cold, dark Marchevening, with a sharp wind and a fine rain beating upon our faces, afit setting for the wild common over which our road passed and thetragic goal to which it led us.




     CHAPTER II     The Tiger of San Pedro

A cold and melancholy walk of a couple of miles brought us to a highwooden gate, which opened into a gloomy avenue of chestnuts. Thecurved and shadowed drive led us to a low, dark house, pitch-blackagainst a slate-coloured sky. From the front window upon the left ofthe door there peeped a glimmer of a feeble light.
"There's a constable in possession," said Baynes. "I'll knock at thewindow." He stepped across the grass plot and tapped with his hand onthe pane. Through the fogged glass I dimly saw a man spring up from achair beside the fire, and heard a sharp cry from within the room. Aninstant later a white-faced, hard-breathing policeman had opened thedoor, the candle wavering in his trembling hand.
"What's the matter, Walters?" asked Baynes sharply.
The man mopped his forehead with his handkerchief and agave a longsigh of relief.
"I am glad you have come, sir. It has been a long evening, and Idon't think my nerve is as good as it was."
"Your nerve, Walters? I should not have thought you had a nerve inyour body."
"Well, sir, it's this lonely, silent house and the queer thing in thekitchen. Then when you tapped at the window I thought it had comeagain."
"That what had come again?"
"The devil, sir, for all I know. It was at the window."
"What was at the window, and when?"
"It was just about two hours ago. The light was just fading. I wassitting reading in the chair. I don't know what made me look up, butthere was a face looking in at me through the lower pane. Lord, sir,what a face it was! I'll see it in my dreams."
"Tut, tut, Walters. This is not talk for a police-constable."
"I know, sir, I know; but it shook me, sir, and there's no use todeny it. It wasn't black, sir, nor was it white, nor any colour thatI know but a kind of queer shade like clay with a splash of milk init. Then there was the size of it--it was twice yours, sir. And thelook of it--the great staring goggle eyes, and the line of whiteteeth like a hungry beast. I tell you, sir, I couldn't move a finger,nor get my breath, till it whisked away and was gone. Out I ran andthrough the shrubbery, but thank God there was no one there."
"If I didn't know you were a good man, Walters, I should put a blackmark against you for this. If it were the devil himself a constableon duty should never thank God that he could not lay his hands uponhim. I suppose the whole thing is not a vision and a touch ofnerves?"
"That, at least, is very easily settled," said Holmes, lighting hislittle pocket lantern. "Yes," he reported, after a short examinationof the grass bed, "a number twelve shoe, I should say. If he was allon the same scale as his foot he must certainly have been a giant."
"What became of him?"
"He seems to have broken through the shrubbery and made for theroad."
"Well," said the inspector with a grave and thoughtful face, "whoeverhe may have been, and whatever he may have wanted, he's gone for thepresent, and we have more immediate things to attend to. Now, Mr.Holmes, with your permission, I will show you round the house."
The various bedrooms and sitting-rooms had yielded nothing to acareful search. Apparently the tenants had brought little or nothingwith them, and all the furniture down to the smallest details hadbeen taken over with the house. A good deal of clothing with thestamp of Marx and Co., High Holborn, had been left behind.Telegraphic inquiries had been already made which showed that Marxknew nothing of his customer save that he was a good payer. Odds andends, some pipes, a few novels, two of them in Spanish, andold-fashioned pinfire revolver, and a guitar were among the personalproperty.
"Nothing in all this," said Baynes, stalking, candle in hand, fromroom to room. "But now, Mr. Holmes, I invite your attention to thekitchen."
It was a gloomy, high-ceilinged room at the back of the house, with astraw litter in one corner, which served apparently as a bed for thecook. The table was piled with half-eaten dishes and dirty plates,the debris of last night's dinner.
"Look at this," said Baynes. "What do you make of it?"
He held up his candle before an extraordinary object which stood atthe back of the dresser. It was so wrinkled and shrunken and witheredthat it was difficult to say what it might have been. One could butsay that it was black and leathery and that it bore some resemblanceto a dwarfish, human figure. At first, as I examined it, I thoughtthat it was a mummified negro baby, and then it seemed a very twistedand ancient monkey. Finally I was left in doubt as to whether it wasanimal or human. A double band of white shells were strung round thecentre of it.
"Very interesting--very interesting, indeed!" said Holmes, peering atthis sinister relic. "Anything more?"
In silence Baynes led the way to the sink and held forward hiscandle. The limbs and body of some large, white bird, torn savagelyto pieces with the feathers still on, were littered all over it.Holmes pointed to the wattles on the severed head.
"A white cock," said he. "Most interesting! It is really a verycurious case."
But Mr. Baynes had kept his most sinister exhibit to the last. Fromunder the sink he drew a zinc pail which contained a quantity ofblood. Then from the table he took a platter heaped with small piecesof charred bone.
"Something has been killed and something has been burned. We rakedall these out of the fire. We had a doctor in this morning. He saysthat they are not human."
Holmes smiled and rubbed his hands.
"I must congratulate you, Inspector, on handling so distinctive andinstructive a case. Your powers, if I may say so without offence,seem superior to your opportunities."
Inspector Baynes's small eyes twinkled with pleasure.
"You're right, Mr. Holmes. We stagnate in the provinces. A case ofthis sort gives a man a chance, and I hope that I shall take it. Whatdo you make of these bones?"
"A lamb, I should say, or a kid."
"And the white cock?"
"Curious, Mr. Baynes, very curious. I should say almost unique."
"Yes, sir, there must have been some very strange people with somevery strange ways in this house. One of them is dead. Did hiscompanions follow him and kill him? If they did we should have them,for every port is watched. But my own views are different. Yes, sir,my own views are very different."
"You have a theory then?"
"And I'll work it myself, Mr. Holmes. It's only due to my own creditto do so. Your name is made, but I have still to make mine. I shouldbe glad to be able to say afterwards that I had solved it withoutyour help."
Holmes laughed good-humoredly.
"Well, well, Inspector," said he. "Do you follow your path and I willfollow mine. My results are always very much at your service if youcare to apply to me for them. I think that I have seen all that Iwish in this house, and that my time may be more profitably employedelsewhere. Au revoir and good luck!"
I could tell by numerous subtle signs, which might have been lostupon anyone but myself, that Holmes was on a hot scent. As impassiveas ever to the casual observer, there were none the less a subduedeagerness and suggestion of tension in his brightened eyes andbrisker manner which assured me that the game was afoot. After hishabit he said nothing, and after mine I asked no questions.Sufficient for me to share the sport and lend my humble help to thecapture without distracting that intent brain with needlessinterruption. All would come round to me in due time.
I waited, therefore--but to my ever-deepening disappointment I waitedin vain. Day succeeded day, and my friend took no step forward. Onemorning he spent in town, and I learned from a casual reference thathe had visited the British Museum. Save for this one excursion, hespent his days in long and often solitary walks, or in chatting witha number of village gossips whose acquaintance he had cultivated.
"I'm sure, Watson, a week in the country will be invaluable to you,"he remarked. "It is very pleasant to see the first green shoots uponthe hedges and the catkins on the hazels once again. With a spud, atin box, and an elementary book on botany, there are instructive daysto be spent." He prowled about with this equipment himself, but itwas a poor show of plants which he would bring back of an evening.
Occasionally in our rambles we came across Inspector Baynes. His fat,red face wreathed itself in smiles and his small eyes glittered as hegreeted my companion. He said little about the case, but from thatlittle we gathered that he also was not dissatisfied at the course ofevents. I must admit, however, that I was somewhat surprised when,some five days after the crime, I opened my morning paper to find inlarge letters:
                          The Oxshott Mystery                              a solution                      Arrest of Supposed Assassin
Holmes sprang in his chair as if he had been stung when I read theheadlines.
"By Jove!" he cried. "You don't mean that Baynes has got him?"
"Apparently," said I as I read the following report:
"Great excitement was caused in Esher and the neighbouring districtwhen it was learned late last night that an arrest had been effectedin connection with the Oxshott murder. It will be remembered that Mr.Garcia, of Wisteria Lodge, was found dead on Oxshott Common, his bodyshowing signs of extreme violence, and that on the same night hisservant and his cook fled, which appeared to show their participationin the crime. It was suggested, but never proved, that the deceasedgentleman may have had valuables in the house, and that theirabstraction was the motive of the crime. Every effort was made byInspector Baynes, who has the case in hand, to ascertain the hidingplace of the fugitives, and he had good reason to believe that theyhad not gone far but were lurking in some retreat which had beenalready prepared. It was certain from the first, however, that theywould eventually be detected, as the cook, from the evidence of oneor two tradespeople who have caught a glimpse of him through thewindow, was a man of most remarkable appearance--being a huge andhideous mulatto, with yellowish features of a pronounced negroidtype. This man has been seen since the crime, for he was detected andpursued by Constable Walters on the same evening, when he had theaudacity to revisit Wisteria Lodge. Inspector Baynes, consideringthat such a visit must have some purpose in view and was likely,therefore, to be repeated, abandoned the house but left an ambuscadein the shrubbery. The man walked into the trap and was captured lastnight after a struggle in which Constable Downing was badly bitten bythe savage. We understand that when the prison is brought before themagistrates a remand will be applied for by the police, and thatgreat developments are hoped from his capture."
"Really we must see Baynes at once," cried Holmes, picking up hishat. "We will just catch him before he starts." We hurried down thevillage street and found, as we had expected, that the inspector wasjust leaving his lodgings.
"You've seen the paper, Mr. Holmes?" he asked, holding one out to us.
"Yes, Baynes, I've seen it. Pray don't think it a liberty if I giveyou a word of friendly warning."
"Of warning, Mr. Holmes?"
"I have looked into this case with some care, and I am not convincedthat you are on the right lines. I don't want you to commit yourselftoo far unless you are sure."
"You're very kind, Mr. Holmes."
"I assure you I speak for your good."
It seemed to me that something like a wink quivered for an instantover one of Mr. Baynes's tiny eyes.
"We agreed to work on our own lines, Mr. Holmes. That's what I amdoing."
"Oh, very good," said Holmes. "Don't blame me."
"No, sir; I believe you mean well by me. But we all have our ownsystems, Mr. Holmes. You have yours, and maybe I have mine."
"Let us say no more about it."
"You're welcome always to my news. This fellow is a perfect savage,as strong as a cart-horse and as fierce as the devil. He chewedDowning's thumb nearly off before they could master him. He hardlyspeaks a word of English, and we can get nothing out of him butgrunts."
"And you think you have evidence that he murdered his late master?"
"I didn't say so, Mr. Holmes; I didn't say so. We all have our littleways. You try yours and I will try mine. That's the agreement."
Holmes shrugged his shoulders as we walked away together. "I can'tmake the man out. He seems to be riding for a fall. Well, as he says,we must each try our own way and see what comes of it. But there'ssomething in Inspector Baynes which I can't quite understand."
"Just sit down in that chair, Watson," said Sherlock Holmes when wehad returned to our apartment at the Bull. "I want to put you intouch with the situation, as I may need your help to-night. Let meshow you the evolution of this case so far as I have been able tofollow it. Simple as it has been in its leading features, it has nonethe less presented surprising difficulties in the way of an arrest.There are gaps in that direction which we have still to fill.
"We will go back to the note which was handed in to Garcia upon theevening of his death. We may put aside this idea of Baynes's thatGarcia's servants were concerned in the matter. The proof of thislies in the fact that it was he who had arranged for the presence ofScott Eccles, which could only have been done for the purpose of analibi. It was Garcia, then, who had an enterprise, and apparently acriminal enterprise, in hand that night in the course of which he methis death. I say 'criminal' because only a man with a criminalenterprise desires to establish an alibi. Who, then, is most likelyto have taken his life? Surely the person against whom the criminalenterprise was directed. So far it seems to me that we are on safeground.
"We can now see a reason for the disappearance of Garcia's household.They were all confederates in the same unknown crime. If it came offwhen Garcia returned, any possible suspicion would be warded off bythe Englishman's evidence, and all would be well. But the attempt wasa dangerous one, and if Garcia did not return by a certain hour itwas probable that his own life had been sacrificed. It had beenarranged, therefore, that in such a case his two subordinates were tomake for some prearranged spot where they could escape investigationand be in a position afterwards to renew their attempt. That wouldfully explain the facts, would it not?"
The whole inexplicable tangle seemed to straighten out before me. Iwondered, as I always did, how it had not been obvious to me before.
"But why should one servant return?"
"We can imagine that in the confusion of flight something precious,something which he could not bear to part with, had been left behind.That would explain his persistence, would it not?"
"Well, what is the next step?"
"The next step is the note received by Garcia at the dinner. Itindicates a confederate at the other end. Now, where was the otherend? I have already shown you that it could only lie in some largehouse, and that the number of large houses is limited. My first daysin this village were devoted to a series of walks in which in theintervals of my botanical researches I made a reconnaissance of allthe large houses and an examination of the family history of theoccupants. One house, and only one, riveted my attention. It is thefamous old Jacobean grange of High Gable, one mile on the fartherside of Oxshott, and less than half a mile from the scene of thetragedy. The other mansions belonged to prosaic and respectablepeople who live far aloof from romance. But Mr. Henderson, of HighGable, was by all accounts a curious man to whom curious adventuresmight befall. I concentrated my attention, therefore, upon him andhis household.
"A singular set of people, Watson--the man himself the most singularof them all. I managed to see him on a plausible pretext, but Iseemed to read in his dark, deepset, brooding eyes that he wasperfectly aware of my true business. He is a man of fifty, strong,active, with iron-gray hair, great bunched black eyebrows, the stepof a deer and the air of an emperor--a fierce, masterful man, with ared-hot spirit behind his parchment face. He is either a foreigner orhas lived long in the tropics, for he is yellow and sapless, buttough as whipcord. His friend and secretary, Mr. Lucas, isundoubtedly a foreigner, chocolate brown, wily, suave, and catlike,with a poisonous gentleness of speech. You see, Watson, we have comealready upon two sets of foreigners--one at Wisteria Lodge and one atHigh Gable--so our gaps are beginning to close.
"These two men, close and confidential friends, are the centre of thehousehold; but there is one other person who for our immediatepurpose may be even more important. Henderson has two children--girlsof eleven and thirteen. Their governess is a Miss Burnet, anEnglishwoman of forty or thereabouts. There is also one confidentialmanservant. This little group forms the real family, for their travelabout together, and Henderson is a great traveller, always on themove. It is only within the last weeks that he has returned, after ayear's absence, to High Gable. I may add that he is enormously rich,and whatever his whims may be he can very easily satisfy them. Forthe rest, his house is full of butlers, footmen, maidservants, andthe usual overfed, underworked staff of a large English countryhouse.
"So much I learned partly from village gossip and partly from my ownobservation. There are no better instruments than discharged servantswith a grievance, and I was lucky enough to find one. I call it luck,but it would not have come my way had I not been looking out for it.As Baynes remarks, we all have our systems. It was my system whichenabled me to find John Warner, late gardener of High Gable, sackedin a moment of temper by his imperious employer. He in turn hadfriends among the indoor servants who unite in their fear and dislikeof their master. So I had my key to the secrets of the establishment.
"Curious people, Watson! I don't pretend to understand it all yet,but very curious people anyway. It's a double-winged house, and theservants live on one side, the family on the other. There's no linkbetween the two save for Henderson's own servant, who serves thefamily's meals. Everything is carried to a certain door, which formsthe one connection. Governess and children hardly go out at all,except into the garden. Henderson never by any chance walks alone.His dark secretary is like his shadow. The gossip among the servantsis that their master is terribly afraid of something. 'Sold his soulto the devil in exchange for money,' says Warner, 'and expects hiscreditor to come up and claim his own.' Where they came from, or whothey are, nobody has an idea. They are very violent. Twice Hendersonhas lashed at folk with his dog-whip, and only his long purse andheavy compensation have kept him out of the courts.
"Well, now, Watson, let us judge the situation by this newinformation. We may take it that the letter came out of this strangehousehold and was an invitation to Garcia to carry out some attemptwhich had already been planned. Who wrote the note? It was someonewithin the citadel, and it was a woman. Who then but Miss Burnet, thegoverness? All our reasoning seems to point that way. At any rate, wemay take it as a hypothesis and see what consequences it wouldentail. I may add that Miss Burnet's age and character make itcertain that my first idea that there might be a love interest in ourstory is out of the question.
"If she wrote the note she was presumably the friend and confederateof Garcia. What, then, might she be expected to do if she heard ofhis death? If he met it in some nefarious enterprise her lips mightbe sealed. Still, in her heart, she must retain bitterness and hatredagainst those who had killed him and would presumably help so far asshe could to have revenge upon them. Could we see her, then and tryto use her? That was my first thought. But now we come to a sinisterfact. Miss Burnet has not been seen by any human eye since the nightof the murder. From that evening she has utterly vanished. Is shealive? Has she perhaps met her end on the same night as the friendwhom she had summoned? Or is she merely a prisoner? There is thepoint which we still have to decide.
"You will appreciate the difficulty of the situation, Watson. Thereis nothing upon which we can apply for a warrant. Our whole schememight seem fantastic if laid before a magistrate. The woman'sdisappearance counts for nothing, since in that extraordinaryhousehold any member of it might be invisible for a week. And yet shemay at the present moment be in danger of her life. All I can do isto watch the house and leave my agent, Warner, on guard at the gates.We can't let such a situation continue. If the law can do nothing wemust take the risk ourselves."
"What do you suggest?"
"I know which is her room.  It is accessible from the top of anouthouse.  My suggestion is that you and I go to-night and see if wecan strike at the very heart of the mystery."
It was not, I must confess, a very alluring prospect. The old housewith its atmosphere of murder, the singular and formidableinhabitants, the unknown dangers of the approach, and the fact thatwe were putting ourselves legally in a false position all combined todamp my ardour. But there was something in the ice-cold reasoning ofHolmes which made it impossible to shrink from any adventure which hemight recommend. One knew that thus, and only thus, could a solutionbe found. I clasped his hand in silence, and the die was cast.
But it was not destined that our investigation should have soadventurous an ending. It was about five o'clock, and the shadows ofthe March evening were beginning to fall, when an excited rusticrushed into our room.
"They've gone, Mr. Holmes. They went by the last train. The ladybroke away, and I've got her in a cab downstairs."
"Excellent, Warner!" cried Holmes, springing to his feet. "Watson,the gaps are closing rapidly."
In the cab was a woman, half-collapsed from nervous exhaustion. Shebore upon her aquiline and emaciated face the traces of some recenttragedy. Her head hung listlessly upon her breast, but as she raisedit and turned her dull eyes upon us I saw that her pupils were darkdots in the centre of the broad gray iris. She was drugged withopium.
"I watched at the gate, same as you advised, Mr. Holmes," said ouremissary, the discharged gardener. "When the carriage came out Ifollowed it to the station. She was like one walking in her sleep,but when they tried to get her into the train she came to life andstruggled. They pushed her into the carriage. She fought her way outagain. I took her part, got her into a cab, and here we are. I shan'tforget the face at the carriage window as I led her away. I'd have ashort life if he had his way--the black-eyed, scowling, yellowdevil."
We carried her upstairs, laid her on the sofa, and a couple of cupsof the strongest coffee soon cleared her brain from the mists of thedrug. Baynes had been summoned by Holmes, and the situation rapidlyexplained to him.
"Why, sir, you've got me the very evidence I want," said theinspector warmly, shaking my friend by the hand. "I was on the samescent as you from the first."
"What! You were after Henderson?"
"Why, Mr. Holmes, when you were crawling in the shrubbery at HighGable I was up one of the trees in the plantation and saw you downbelow. It was just who would get his evidence first."
"Then why did you arrest the mulatto?"
Baynes chuckled.
"I was sure Henderson, as he calls himself, felt that he wassuspected, and that he would lie low and make no move so long as hethought he was in any danger. I arrested the wrong man to make himbelieve that our eyes were off him. I knew he would be likely toclear off then and give us a chance of getting at Miss Burnet."
Holmes laid his hand upon the inspector's shoulder.
"You will rise high in your profession. You have instinct andintuition," said he.
Baynes flushed with pleasure.
"I've had a plain-clothes man waiting at the station all the week.Wherever the High Gable folk go he will keep them in sight. But hemust have been hard put to it when Miss Burnet broke away. However,your man picked her up, and it all ends well. We can't arrest withouther evidence, that is clear, so the sooner we get a statement thebetter."
"Every minute she gets stronger," said Holmes, glancing at thegoverness. "But tell me, Baynes, who is this man Henderson?"
"Henderson," the inspector answered, "is Don Murillo, once called theTiger of San Pedro."
The Tiger of San Pedro! The whole history of the man came back to mein a flash. He had made his name as the most lewd and bloodthirstytyrant that had ever governed any country with a pretence tocivilization. Strong, fearless, and energetic, he had sufficientvirtue to enable him to impose his odious vices upon a coweringpeople for ten or twelve years. His name was a terror through allCentral America. At the end of that time there was a universal risingagainst him. But he was as cunning as he was cruel, and at the firstwhisper of coming trouble he had secretly conveyed his treasuresaboard a ship which was manned by devoted adherents. It was an emptypalace which was stormed by the insurgents next day. The dictator,his two children, his secretary, and his wealth had all escaped them.From that moment he had vanished from the world, and his identity hadbeen a frequent subject for comment in the European press.
"Yes, sir, Don Murillo, the Tiger of San Pedro," said Baynes. "If youlook it up you will find that the San Pedro colours are green andwhite, same as in the note, Mr. Holmes. Henderson he called himself,but I traced him back, Paris and Rome and Madrid to Barcelona, wherehis ship came in in '86. They've been looking for him all the timefor their revenge, but it is only now that they have begun to findhim out."
"They discovered him a year ago," said Miss Burnet, who had sat upand was now intently following the conversation. "Once already hislife has been attempted, but some evil spirit shielded him. Now,again, it is the noble, chivalrous Garcia who has fallen, while themonster goes safe. But another will come, and yet another, until someday justice will be done; that is as certain as the rise ofto-morrow's sun." Her thin hands clenched, and her worn face blanchedwith the passion of her hatred.
"But how come you into this matter, Miss Burnet?" asked Holmes. "Howcan an English lady join in such a murderous affair?"
"I join in it because there is no other way in the world by whichjustice can be gained. What does the law of England care for therivers of blood shed years ago in San Pedro, or for the shipload oftreasure which this man has stolen? To you they are like crimescommitted in some other planet. But we know. We have learned thetruth in sorrow and in suffering. To us there is no fiend in helllike Juan Murillo, and no peace in life while his victims still cryfor vengeance."
"No doubt," said Holmes, "he was as you say. I have heard that he wasatrocious. But how are you affected?"
"I will tell you it all. This villain's policy was to murder, on onepretext or another, every man who showed such promise that he mightin time come to be a dangerous rival. My husband--yes, my real nameis Signora Victor Durando--was the San Pedro minister in London. Hemet me and married me there. A nobler man never lived upon earth.Unhappily, Murillo heard of his excellence, recalled him on somepretext, and had him shot. With a premonition of his fate he hadrefused to take me with him. His estates were confiscated, and I wasleft with a pittance and a broken heart.
"Then came the downfall of the tyrant. He escaped as you have justdescribed. But the many whose lives he had ruined, whose nearest anddearest had suffered torture and death at his hands, would not letthe matter rest. They banded themselves into a society which shouldnever be dissolved until the work was done. It was my part after wehad discovered in the transformed Henderson the fallen despot, toattach myself to his household and keep the others in touch with hismovements. This I was able to do by securing the position ofgoverness in his family. He little knew that the woman who faced himat every meal was the woman whose husband he had hurried at an hour'snotice into eternity. I smiled on him, did my duty to his children,and bided my time. An attempt was made in Paris and failed. Wezig-zagged swiftly here and there over Europe to throw off thepursuers and finally returned to this house, which he had taken uponhis first arrival in England.
"But here also the ministers of justice were waiting. Knowing that hewould return there, Garcia, who is the son of the former highestdignitary in San Pedro, was waiting with two trusty companions ofhumble station, all three fired with the same reasons for revenge. Hecould do little during the day, for Murillo took every precaution andnever went out save with his satellite Lucas, or Lopez as he wasknown in the days of his greatness. At night, however, he sleptalone, and the avenger might find him. On a certain evening, whichhad been prearranged, I sent my friend final instructions, for theman was forever on the alert and continually changed his room. I wasto see that the doors were open and the signal of a green or whitelight in a window which faced the drive was to give notice if all wassafe or if the attempt had better be postponed.
"But everything went wrong with us. In some way I had excited thesuspicion of Lopez, the secretary. He crept up behind me and sprangupon me just as I had finished the note. He and his master dragged meto my room and held judgment upon me as a convicted traitress. Thenand there they would have plunged their knives into me could theyhave seen how to escape the consequences of the deed. Finally, aftermuch debate, they concluded that my murder was too dangerous. Butthey determined to get rid forever of Garcia. They had gagged me, andMurillo twisted my arm round until I gave him the address. I swearthat he might have twisted it off had I understood what it would meanto Garcia. Lopez addressed the note which I had written, sealed itwith his sleeve-link, and sent it by the hand of the servant, Jose.How they murdered him I do not know, save that it was Murillo's handwho struck him down, for Lopez had remained to guard me. I believe hemust have waited among the gorse bushes through which the path windsand struck him down as he passed. At first they were of a mind to lethim enter the house and to kill him as a detected burglar; but theyargued that if they were mixed up in an inquiry their own identitywould at once be publicly disclosed and they would be open to furtherattacks. With the death of Garcia, the pursuit might cease, sincesuch a death might frighten others from the task.
"All would now have been well for them had it not been for myknowledge of what they had done. I have no doubt that there weretimes when my life hung in the balance. I was confined to my room,terrorized by the most horrible threats, cruelly ill-used to break myspirit--see this stab on my shoulder and the bruises from end to endof my arms--and a gag was thrust into my mouth on the one occasionwhen I tried to call from the window. For five days this cruelimprisonment continued, with hardly enough food to hold body and soultogether. This afternoon a good lunch was brought me, but the momentafter I took it I knew that I had been drugged. In a sort of dream Iremember being half-led, half-carried to the carriage; in the samestate I was conveyed to the train. Only then, when the wheels werealmost moving, did I suddenly realize that my liberty lay in my ownhands. I sprang out, they tried to drag me back, and had it not beenfor the help of this good man, who led me to the cab, I should neverhad broken away. Now, thank God, I am beyond their power forever."
We had all listened intently to this remarkable statement. It wasHolmes who broke the silence.
"Our difficulties are not over," he remarked, shaking his head. "Ourpolice work ends, but our legal work begins."
"Exactly," said I. "A plausible lawyer could make it out as an act ofself-defence. There may be a hundred crimes in the background, but itis only on this one that they can be tried."
"Come, come," said Baynes cheerily, "I think better of the law thanthat. Self-defence is one thing. To entice a man in cold blood withthe object of murdering him is another, whatever danger you may fearfrom him. No, no, we shall all be justified when we see the tenantsof High Gable at the next Guildford Assizes."
It is a matter of history, however, that a little time was still toelapse before the Tiger of San Pedro should meet with his deserts.Wily and bold, he and his companion threw their pursuer off theirtrack by entering a lodging-house in Edmonton Street and leaving bythe back-gate into Curzon Square. From that day they were seen nomore in England. Some six months afterwards the Marquess of Montalvaand Signor Rulli, his secretary, were both murdered in their rooms atthe Hotel Escurial at Madrid. The crime was ascribed to Nihilism, andthe murderers were never arrested. Inspector Baynes visited us atBaker Street with a printed description of the dark face of thesecretary, and of the masterful features, the magnetic black eyes,and the tufted brows of his master. We could not doubt that justice,if belated, had come at last.
"A chaotic case, my dear Watson," said Holmes over an evening pipe."It will not be possible for you to present in that compact formwhich is dear to your heart. It covers two continents, concerns twogroups of mysterious persons, and is further complicated by thehighly respectable presence of our friend, Scott Eccles, whoseinclusion shows me that the deceased Garcia had a scheming mind and awell-developed instinct of self-preservation. It is remarkable onlyfor the fact that amid a perfect jungle of possibilities we, with ourworthy collaborator, the inspector, have kept our close hold on theessentials and so been guided along the crooked and winding path. Isthere any point which is not quite clear to you?"
"The object of the mulatto cook's return?"
"I think that the strange creature in the kitchen may account for it.The man was a primitive savage from the backwoods of San Pedro, andthis was his fetish. When his companion and he had fled to someprearranged retreat--already occupied, no doubt by a confederate--thecompanion had persuaded him to leave so compromising an article offurniture. But the mulatto's heart was with it, and he was drivenback to it next day, when, on reconnoitering through the window, hefound policeman Walters in possession. He waited three days longer,and then his piety or his superstition drove him to try once more.Inspector Baynes, who, with his usual astuteness, had minimized theincident before me, had really recognized its importance and had lefta trap into which the creature walked. Any other point, Watson?"
"The torn bird, the pail of blood, the charred bones, all the mysteryof that weird kitchen?"
Holmes smiled as he turned up an entry in his note-book.
"I spent a morning in the British Museum reading up on that and otherpoints. Here is a quotation from Eckermann's Voodooism and theNegroid Religions:
"'The true voodoo-worshipper attempts nothing of importance withoutcertain sacrifices which are intended to propitiate his unclean gods.In extreme cases these rites take the form of human sacrificesfollowed by cannibalism. The more usual victims are a white cock,which is plucked in pieces alive, or a black goat, whose throat iscut and body burned.'
"So you see our savage friend was very orthodox in his ritual. It isgrotesque, Watson," Holmes added, as he slowly fastened his notebook,"but, as I have had occasion to remark, there is but one step fromthe grotesque to the horrible."





                  THE ADVENTURE OF THE CARDBOARD BOX
In choosing a few typical cases which illustrate the remarkablemental qualities of my friend, Sherlock Holmes, I have endeavoured,as far as possible, to select those which presented the minimum ofsensationalism, while offering a fair field for his talents. It is,however, unfortunately impossible entirely to separate thesensational from the criminal, and a chronicler is left in thedilemma that he must either sacrifice details which are essential tohis statement and so give a false impression of the problem, or hemust use matter which chance, and not choice, has provided him with.With this short preface I shall turn to my notes of what proved to bea strange, though a peculiarly terrible, chain of events.
It was a blazing hot day in August. Baker Street was like an oven,and the glare of the sunlight upon the yellow brickwork of the houseacross the road was painful to the eye. It was hard to believe thatthese were the same walls which loomed so gloomily through the fogsof winter. Our blinds were half-drawn, and Holmes lay curled upon thesofa, reading and re-reading a letter which he had received by themorning post. For myself, my term of service in India had trained meto stand heat better than cold, and a thermometer at ninety was nohardship. But the morning paper was uninteresting. Parliament hadrisen. Everybody was out of town, and I yearned for the glades of theNew Forest or the shingle of Southsea. A depleted bank account hadcaused me to postpone my holiday, and as to my companion, neither thecountry nor the sea presented the slightest attraction to him. Heloved to lie in the very center of five millions of people, with hisfilaments stretching out and running through them, responsive toevery little rumour or suspicion of unsolved crime. Appreciation ofnature found no place among his many gifts, and his only change waswhen he turned his mind from the evil-doer of the town to track downhis brother of the country.
Finding that Holmes was too absorbed for conversation I had tossedside the barren paper, and leaning back in my chair I fell into abrown study. Suddenly my companion's voice broke in upon my thoughts:
"You are right, Watson," said he. "It does seem a most preposterousway of settling a dispute."
"Most preposterous!" I exclaimed, and then suddenly realizing how hehad echoed the inmost thought of my soul, I sat up in my chair andstared at him in blank amazement.
"What is this, Holmes?" I cried. "This is beyond anything which Icould have imagined."
He laughed heartily at my perplexity.
"You remember," said he, "that some little time ago when I read youthe passage in one of Poe's sketches in which a close reasonerfollows the unspoken thoughts of his companion, you were inclined totreat the matter as a mere tour-de-force of the author. On myremarking that I was constantly in the habit of doing the same thingyou expressed incredulity."
"Oh, no!"
"Perhaps not with your tongue, my dear Watson, but certainly withyour eyebrows. So when I saw you throw down your paper and enter upona train of thought, I was very happy to have the opportunity ofreading it off, and eventually of breaking into it, as a proof that Ihad been in rapport with you."
But I was still far from satisfied. "In the example which you read tome," said I, "the reasoner drew his conclusions from the actions ofthe man whom he observed. If I remember right, he stumbled over aheap of stones, looked up at the stars, and so on. But I have beenseated quietly in my chair, and what clues can I have given you?"
"You do yourself an injustice. The features are given to man as themeans by which he shall express his emotions, and yours are faithfulservants."
"Do you mean to say that you read my train of thoughts from myfeatures?"
"Your features and especially your eyes. Perhaps you cannot yourselfrecall how your reverie commenced?"
"No, I cannot."
"Then I will tell you. After throwing down your paper, which was theaction which drew my attention to you, you sat for half a minute witha vacant expression. Then your eyes fixed themselves upon your newlyframed picture of General Gordon, and I saw by the alteration in yourface that a train of thought had been started. But it did not leadvery far. Your eyes flashed across to the unframed portrait of HenryWard Beecher which stands upon the top of your books. Then youglanced up at the wall, and of course your meaning was obvious. Youwere thinking that if the portrait were framed it would just coverthat bare space and correspond with Gordon's picture there."
"You have followed me wonderfully!" I exclaimed.
"So far I could hardly have gone astray. But now your thoughts wentback to Beecher, and you looked hard across as if you were studyingthe character in his features. Then your eyes ceased to pucker, butyou continued to look across, and your face was thoughtful. You wererecalling the incidents of Beecher's career. I was well aware thatyou could not do this without thinking of the mission which heundertook on behalf of the North at the time of the Civil War, for Iremember your expressing your passionate indignation at the way inwhich he was received by the more turbulent of our people. You feltso strongly about it that I knew you could not think of Beecherwithout thinking of that also. When a moment later I saw your eyeswander away from the picture, I suspected that your mind had nowturned to the Civil War, and when I observed that your lips set, youreyes sparkled, and your hands clenched I was positive that you wereindeed thinking of the gallantry which was shown by both sides inthat desperate struggle. But then, again, your face grew sadder, youshook your head. You were dwelling upon the sadness and horror anduseless waste of life. Your hand stole towards your own old wound anda smile quivered on your lips, which showed me that the ridiculousside of this method of settling international questions had forceditself upon your mind. At this point I agreed with you that it waspreposterous and was glad to find that all my deductions had beencorrect."
"Absolutely!" said I. "And now that you have explained it, I confessthat I am as amazed as before."
"It was very superficial, my dear Watson, I assure you. I should nothave intruded it upon your attention had you not shown someincredulity the other day. But I have in my hands here a littleproblem which may prove to be more difficult of solution than mysmall essay in thought reading. Have you observed in the paper ashort paragraph referring to the remarkable contents of a packet sentthrough the post to Miss Cushing, of Cross Street, Croydon?"
"No, I saw nothing."
"Ah! then you must have overlooked it. Just toss it over to me. Hereit is, under the financial column. Perhaps you would be good enoughto read it aloud."
I picked up the paper which he had thrown back to me and read theparagraph indicated. It was headed, "A Gruesome Packet."
"Miss Susan Cushing, living at Cross Street, Croydon, has been madethe victim of what must be regarded as a peculiarly revoltingpractical joke unless some more sinister meaning should prove to beattached to the incident. At two o'clock yesterday afternoon a smallpacket, wrapped in brown paper, was handed in by the postman. Acardboard box was inside, which was filled with coarse salt. Onemptying this, Miss Cushing was horrified to find two human ears,apparently quite freshly severed. The box had been sent by parcelpost from Belfast upon the morning before. There is no indication asto the sender, and the matter is the more mysterious as Miss Cushing,who is a maiden lady of fifty, has led a most retired life, and hasso few acquaintances or correspondents that it is a rare event forher to receive anything through the post. Some years ago, however,when she resided at Penge, she let apartments in her house to threeyoung medical students, whom she was obliged to get rid of on accountof their noisy and irregular habits. The police are of opinion thatthis outrage may have been perpetrated upon Miss Cushing by theseyouths, who owed her a grudge and who hoped to frighten her bysending her these relics of the dissecting-rooms. Some probability islent to the theory by the fact that one of these students came fromthe north of Ireland, and, to the best of Miss Cushing's belief, fromBelfast. In the meantime, the matter is being actively investigated,Mr. Lestrade, one of the very smartest of our detective officers,being in charge of the case."
"So much for the Daily Chronicle," said Holmes as I finished reading."Now for our friend Lestrade. I had a note from him this morning, inwhich he says:
"I think that this case is very much in your line. We have every hopeof clearing the matter up, but we find a little difficulty in gettinganything to work upon. We have, of course, wired to the Belfastpost-office, but a large number of parcels were handed in upon thatday, and they have no means of identifying this particular one, or ofremembering the sender. The box is a half-pound box of honeydewtobacco and does not help us in any way. The medical student theorystill appears to me to be the most feasible, but if you should have afew hours to spare I should be very happy to see you out here. Ishall be either at the house or in the police-station all day.
"What say you, Watson? Can you rise superior to the heat and run downto Croydon with me on the off chance of a case for your annals?"
"I was longing for something to do."
"You shall have it then. Ring for our boots and tell them to order acab. I'll be back in a moment when I have changed my dressing-gownand filled my cigar-case."
A shower of rain fell while we were in the train, and the heat wasfar less oppressive in Croydon than in town. Holmes had sent on awire, so that Lestrade, as wiry, as dapper, and as ferret-like asever, was waiting for us at the station. A walk of five minutes tookus to Cross Street, where Miss Cushing resided.
It was a very long street of two-story brick houses, neat and prim,with whitened stone steps and little groups of aproned womengossiping at the doors. Halfway down, Lestrade stopped and tapped ata door, which was opened by a small servant girl. Miss Cushing wassitting in the front room, into which we were ushered. She was aplacid-faced woman, with large, gentle eyes, and grizzled haircurving down over her temples on each side. A worked antimacassar layupon her lap and a basket of coloured silks stood upon a stool besideher.
"They are in the outhouse, those dreadful things," said she asLestrade entered. "I wish that you would take them away altogether."
"So I shall, Miss Cushing. I only kept them here until my friend, Mr.Holmes, should have seen them in your presence."
"Why in my presence, sir?"
"In case he wished to ask any questions."
"What is the use of asking me questions when I tell you I knownothing whatever about it?"
"Quite so, madam," said Holmes in his soothing way. "I have no doubtthat you have been annoyed more than enough already over thisbusiness."
"Indeed I have, sir. I am a quiet woman and live a retired life. Itis something new for me to see my name in the papers and to find thepolice in my house. I won't have those things in here, Mr. Lestrade.If you wish to see them you must go to the outhouse."
It was a small shed in the narrow garden which ran behind the house.Lestrade went in and brought out a yellow cardboard box, with a pieceof brown paper and some string. There was a bench at the end of thepath, and we all sat down while Homes examined one by one, thearticles which Lestrade had handed to him.
"The string is exceedingly interesting," he remarked, holding it upto the light and sniffing at it. "What do you make of this string,Lestrade?"
"It has been tarred."
"Precisely. It is a piece of tarred twine. You have also, no doubt,remarked that Miss Cushing has cut the cord with a scissors, as canbe seen by the double fray on each side. This is of importance."
"I cannot see the importance," said Lestrade.
"The importance lies in the fact that the knot is left intact, andthat this knot is of a peculiar character."
"It is very neatly tied. I had already made a note of that effect,"said Lestrade complacently.
"So much for the string, then," said Holmes, smiling, "now for thebox wrapper. Brown paper, with a distinct smell of coffee. What, didyou not observe it? I think there can be no doubt of it. Addressprinted in rather straggling characters: 'Miss S. Cushing, CrossStreet, Croydon.' Done with a broad-pointed pen, probably a J, andwith very inferior ink. The word 'Croydon' has been originallyspelled with an 'i', which has been changed to 'y'. The parcel wasdirected, then, by a man--the printing is distinctly masculine--oflimited education and unacquainted with the town of Croydon. So far,so good! The box is a yellow, half-pound honeydew box, with nothingdistinctive save two thumb marks at the left bottom corner. It isfilled with rough salt of the quality used for preserving hides andother of the coarser commercial purposes. And embedded in it arethese very singular enclosures."
He took out the two ears as he spoke, and laying a board across hisknee he examined them minutely, while Lestrade and I, bending forwardon each side of him, glanced alternately at these dreadful relics andat the thoughtful, eager face of our companion. Finally he returnedthem to the box once more and sat for a while in deep meditation.
"You have observed, of course," said he at last, "that the ears arenot a pair."
"Yes, I have noticed that. But if this were the practical joke ofsome students from the dissecting-rooms, it would be as easy for themto send two odd ears as a pair."
"Precisely. But this is not a practical joke."
"You are sure of it?"
"The presumption is strongly against it. Bodies in thedissecting-rooms are injected with preservative fluid. These earsbear no signs of this. They are fresh, too. They have been cut offwith a blunt instrument, which would hardly happen if a student haddone it. Again, carbolic or rectified spirits would be thepreservatives which would suggest themselves to the medical mind,certainly not rough salt. I repeat that there is no practical jokehere, but that we are investigating a serious crime."
A vague thrill ran through me as I listened to my companion's wordsand saw the stern gravity which had hardened his features. Thisbrutal preliminary seemed to shadow forth some strange andinexplicable horror in the background. Lestrade, however, shook hishead like a man who is only half convinced.
"There are objections to the joke theory, no doubt," said he, "butthere are much stronger reasons against the other. We know that thiswoman has led a most quiet and respectable life at Penge and here forthe last twenty years. She has hardly been away from her home for aday during that time. Why on earth, then, should any criminal sendher the proofs of his guilt, especially as, unless she is a mostconsummate actress, she understands quite as little of the matter aswe do?"
"That is the problem which we have to solve," Holmes answered, "andfor my part I shall set about it by presuming that my reasoning iscorrect, and that a double murder has been committed. One of theseears is a woman's, small, finely formed, and pierced for an earring.The other is a man's, sun-burned, discoloured, and also pierced foran earring. These two people are presumably dead, or we should haveheard their story before now. To-day is Friday. The packet was postedon Thursday morning. The tragedy, then, occurred on Wednesday orTuesday, or earlier. If the two people were murdered, who but theirmurderer would have sent this sign of his work to Miss Cushing? Wemay take it that the sender of the packet is the man whom we want.But he must have some strong reason for sending Miss Cushing thispacket. What reason then? It must have been to tell her that the deedwas done; or to pain her, perhaps. But in that case she knows who itis. Does she know? I doubt it. If she knew, why should she call thepolice in? She might have buried the ears, and no one would have beenthe wiser. That is what she would have done if she had wished toshield the criminal. But if she does not wish to shield him she wouldgive his name. There is a tangle here which needs straightening out."He had been talking in a high, quick voice, staring blankly up overthe garden fence, but now he sprang briskly to his feet and walkedtowards the house.
"I have a few questions to ask Miss Cushing," said he.
"In that case I may leave you here," said Lestrade, "for I haveanother small business on hand. I think that I have nothing furtherto learn from Miss Cushing. You will find me at the police-station."
"We shall look in on our way to the train," answered Holmes. A momentlater he and I were back in the front room, where the impassive ladywas still quietly working away at her antimacassar. She put it downon her lap as we entered and looked at us with her frank, searchingblue eyes.
"I am convinced, sir," she said, "that this matter is a mistake, andthat the parcel was never meant for me at all. I have said thisseveral times to the gentlemen from Scotland Yard, but he simplylaughs at me. I have not an enemy in the world, as far as I know, sowhy should anyone play me such a trick?"
"I am coming to be of the same opinion, Miss Cushing," said Holmes,taking a seat beside her. "I think that it is more than probable--"He paused, and I was surprised, on glancing round to see that he wasstaring with singular intentness at the lady's profile. Surprise andsatisfaction were both for an instant to be read upon his eager face,though when she glanced round to find out the cause of his silence hehad become as demure as ever. I stared hard myself at her flat,grizzled hair, her trim cap, her little gilt earrings, her placidfeatures; but I could see nothing which could account for mycompanion's evident excitement.
"There were one or two questions--"
"Oh, I am weary of questions!" cried Miss Cushing impatiently.
"You have two sisters, I believe."
"How could you know that?"
"I observed the very instant that I entered the room that you have aportrait group of three ladies upon the mantelpiece, one of whom isundoubtedly yourself, while the others are so exceedingly like youthat there could be no doubt of the relationship."
"Yes, you are quite right. Those are my sisters, Sarah and Mary."
"And here at my elbow is another portrait, taken at Liverpool, ofyour younger sister, in the company of a man who appears to be asteward by his uniform. I observe that she was unmarried at thetime."
"You are very quick at observing."
"That is my trade."
"Well, you are quite right.  But she was married to Mr. Browner a fewdays afterwards. He was on the South American line when that wastaken, but he was so fond of her that he couldn't abide to leave herfor so long, and he got into the Liverpool and London boats."
"Ah, the Conqueror, perhaps?"
"No, the May Day, when last I heard. Jim came down here to see meonce. That was before he broke the pledge; but afterwards he wouldalways take drink when he was ashore, and a little drink would sendhim stark, staring mad. Ah! it was a bad day that ever he took aglass in his hand again. First he dropped me, then he quarrelled withSarah, and now that Mary has stopped writing we don't know how thingsare going with them."
It was evident that Miss Cushing had come upon a subject on which shefelt very deeply. Like most people who lead a lonely life, she wasshy at first, but ended by becoming extremely communicative. She toldus many details about her brother-in-law the steward, and thenwandering off on the subject of her former lodgers, the medicalstudents, she gave us a long account of their delinquencies, withtheir names and those of their hospitals. Holmes listened attentivelyto everything, throwing in a question from time to time.
"About your second sister, Sarah," said he. "I wonder, since you areboth maiden ladies, that you do not keep house together."
"Ah! you don't know Sarah's temper or you would wonder no more. Itried it when I came to Croydon, and we kept on until about twomonths ago, when we had to part. I don't want to say a word againstmy own sister, but she was always meddlesome and hard to please, wasSarah."
"You say that she quarrelled with your Liverpool relations."
"Yes, and they were the best of friends at one time. Why, she went upthere to live in order to be near them. And now she has no word hardenough for Jim Browner. The last six months that she was here shewould speak of nothing but his drinking and his ways. He had caughther meddling, I suspect, and given her a bit of his mind, and thatwas the start of it."
"Thank you, Miss Cushing," said Holmes, rising and bowing. "Yoursister Sarah lives, I think you said, at New Street, Wallington?Good-bye, and I am very sorry that you should have been troubled overa case with which, as you say, you have nothing whatever to do."
There was a cab passing as we came out, and Holmes hailed it.
"How far to Wallington?" he asked.
"Only about a mile, sir."
"Very good. Jump in, Watson. We must strike while the iron is hot.Simple as the case is, there have been one or two very instructivedetails in connection with it. Just pull up at a telegraph office asyou pass, cabby."
Holmes sent off a short wire and for the rest of the drive lay backin the cab, with his hat tilted over his nose to keep the sun fromhis face. Our drive pulled up at a house which was not unlike the onewhich we had just quitted. My companion ordered him to wait, and hadhis hand upon the knocker, when the door opened and a grave younggentleman in black, with a very shiny hat, appeared on the step.
"Is Miss Cushing at home?" asked Holmes.
"Miss Sarah Cushing is extremely ill," said he. "She has beensuffering since yesterday from brain symptoms of great severity. Asher medical adviser, I cannot possibly take the responsibility ofallowing anyone to see her. I should recommend you to call again inten days." He drew on his gloves, closed the door, and marched offdown the street.
"Well, if we can't we can't," said Holmes, cheerfully.
"Perhaps she could not or would not have told you much."
"I did not wish her to tell me anything. I only wanted to look ather. However, I think that I have got all that I want. Drive us tosome decent hotel, cabby, where we may have some lunch, andafterwards we shall drop down upon friend Lestrade at thepolice-station."
We had a pleasant little meal together, during which Holmes wouldtalk about nothing but violins, narrating with great exultation howhe had purchased his own Stradivarius, which was worth at least fivehundred guineas, at a Jew broker's in Tottenham Court Road forfifty-five shillings. This led him to Paganini, and we sat for anhour over a bottle of claret while he told me anecdote after anecdoteof that extraordinary man. The afternoon was far advanced and the hotglare had softened into a mellow glow before we found ourselves atthe police-station. Lestrade was waiting for us at the door.
"A telegram for you, Mr. Holmes," said he.
"Ha! It is the answer!" He tore it open, glanced his eyes over it,and crumpled it into his pocket. "That's all right," said he.
"Have you found out anything?"
"I have found out everything!"
"What!" Lestrade stared at him in amazement. "You are joking."
"I was never more serious in my life. A shocking crime has beencommitted, and I think I have now laid bare every detail of it."
"And the criminal?"
Holmes scribbled a few words upon the back of one of his visitingcards and threw it over to Lestrade.
"That is the name," he said. "You cannot effect an arrest untilto-morrow night at the earliest. I should prefer that you do notmention my name at all in connection with the case, as I choose to beonly associated with those crimes which present some difficulty intheir solution. Come on, Watson." We strode off together to thestation, leaving Lestrade still staring with a delighted face at thecard which Holmes had thrown him.
"The case," said Sherlock Holmes as we chatted over or cigars thatnight in our rooms at Baker Street, "is one where, as in theinvestigations which you have chronicled under the names of 'A Studyin Scarlet' and of 'The Sign of Four,' we have been compelled toreason backward from effects to causes. I have written to Lestradeasking him to supply us with the details which are now wanting, andwhich he will only get after he had secured his man. That he may besafely trusted to do, for although he is absolutely devoid of reason,he is as tenacious as a bulldog when he once understands what he hasto do, and indeed, it is just this tenacity which has brought him tothe top at Scotland Yard."
"Your case is not complete, then?" I asked.
"It is fairly complete in essentials. We know who the author of therevolting business is, although one of the victims still escapes us.Of course, you have formed your own conclusions."
"I presume that this Jim Browner, the steward of a Liverpool boat, isthe man whom you suspect?"
"Oh! it is more than a suspicion."
"And yet I cannot see anything save very vague indications."
"On the contrary, to my mind nothing could be more clear. Let me runover the principal steps. We approached the case, you remember, withan absolutely blank mind, which is always an advantage. We had formedno theories. We were simply there to observe and to draw inferencesfrom our observations. What did we see first? A very placid andrespectable lady, who seemed quite innocent of any secret, and aportrait which showed me that she had two younger sisters. Itinstantly flashed across my mind that the box might have been meantfor one of these. I set the idea aside as one which could bedisproved or confirmed at our leisure. Then we went to the garden, asyou remember, and we saw the very singular contents of the littleyellow box.
"The string was of the quality which is used by sail-makers aboardship, and at once a whiff of the sea was perceptible in ourinvestigation. When I observed that the knot was one which is popularwith sailors, that the parcel had been posted at a port, and that themale ear was pierced for an earring which is so much more commonamong sailors than landsmen, I was quite certain that all the actorsin the tragedy were to be found among our seafaring classes.
"When I came to examine the address of the packet I observed that itwas to Miss S. Cushing. Now, the oldest sister would, of course, beMiss Cushing, and although her initial was 'S' it might belong to oneof the others as well. In that case we should have to commence ourinvestigation from a fresh basis altogether. I therefore went intothe house with the intention of clearing up this point. I was aboutto assure Miss Cushing that I was convinced that a mistake had beenmade when you may remember that I came suddenly to a stop. The factwas that I had just seen something which filled me with surprise andat the same time narrowed the field of our inquiry immensely.
"As a medical man, you are aware, Watson, that there is no part ofthe body which varies so much as the human ear. Each ear is as a rulequite distinctive and differs from all other ones. In last year'sAnthropological Journal you will find two short monographs from mypen upon the subject. I had, therefore, examined the ears in the boxwith the eyes of an expert and had carefully noted their anatomicalpeculiarities. Imagine my surprise, then, when on looking at MissCushing I perceived that her ear corresponded exactly with the femaleear which I had just inspected. The matter was entirely beyondcoincidence. There was the same shortening of the pinna, the samebroad curve of the upper lobe, the same convolution of the innercartilage. In all essentials it was the same ear.
"In the first place, her sister's name was Sarah, and her address haduntil recently been the same, so that it was quite obvious how themistake had occurred and for whom the packet was meant. Then we heardof this steward, married to the third sister, and learned that he hadat one time been so intimate with Miss Sarah that she had actuallygone up to Liverpool to be near the Browners, but a quarrel hadafterwards divided them. This quarrel had put a stop to allcommunications for some months, so that if Browner had occasion toaddress a packet to Miss Sarah, he would undoubtedly have done so toher old address.
"And now the matter had begun to straighten itself out wonderfully.We had learned of the existence of this steward, an impulsive man, ofstrong passions--you remember that he threw up what must have been avery superior berth in order to be nearer to his wife--subject, too,to occasional fits of hard drinking. We had reason to believe thathis wife had been murdered, and that a man--presumably a seafaringman--had been murdered at the same time. Jealousy, of course, at oncesuggests itself as the motive for the crime. And why should theseproofs of the deed be sent to Miss Sarah Cushing? Probably becauseduring her residence in Liverpool she had some hand in bringing aboutthe events which led to the tragedy. You will observe that this lineof boats call at Belfast, Dublin, and Waterford; so that, presumingthat Browner had committed the deed and had embarked at once upon hissteamer, the May Day, Belfast would be the first place at which hecould post his terrible packet.
"A second solution was at this stage obviously possible, and althoughI thought it exceedingly unlikely, I was determined to elucidate itbefore going further. An unsuccessful lover might have killed Mr. andMrs. Browner, and the male ear might have belonged to the husband.There were many grave objections to this theory, but it wasconceivable. I therefore sent off a telegram to my friend Algar, ofthe Liverpool force, and asked him to find out if Mrs. Browner wereat home, and if Browner had departed in the May Day. Then we went onto Wallington to visit Miss Sarah.
"I was curious, in the first place, to see how far the family ear hadbeen reproduced in her. Then, of course, she might give us veryimportant information, but I was not sanguine that she would. Shemust have heard of the business the day before, since all Croydon wasringing with it, and she alone could have understood for whom thepacket was meant. If she had been willing to help justice she wouldprobably have communicated with the police already. However, it wasclearly our duty to see her, so we went. We found that the news ofthe arrival of the packet--for her illness dated from that time--hadsuch an effect upon her as to bring on brain fever. It was clearerthan ever that she understood its full significance, but equallyclear that we should have to wait some time for any assistance fromher.
"However, we were really independent of her help. Our answers werewaiting for us at the police-station, where I had directed Algar tosend them. Nothing could be more conclusive. Mrs. Browner's house hadbeen closed for more than three days, and the neighbours were ofopinion that she had gone south to see her relatives. It had beenascertained at the shipping offices that Browner had left aboard ofthe May Day, and I calculate that she is due in the Thames tomorrownight. When he arrives he will be met by the obtuse but resoluteLestrade, and I have no doubt that we shall have all our detailsfilled in."
Sherlock Holmes was not disappointed in his expectations. Two dayslater he received a bulky envelope, which contained a short note fromthe detective, and a typewritten document, which covered severalpages of foolscap.
"Lestrade has got him all right," said Holmes, glancing up at me."Perhaps it would interest you to hear what he says.
"My dear Mr. Holmes:"In accordance with the scheme which we had formed in order to testour theories" ["the 'we' is rather fine, Watson, is it not?"] "I wentdown to the Albert Dock yesterday at 6 p.m., and boarded the S.S. MayDay, belonging to the Liverpool, Dublin, and London Steam PacketCompany. On inquiry, I found that there was a steward on board of thename of James Browner and that he had acted during the voyage in suchan extraordinary manner that the captain had been compelled torelieve him of his duties. On descending to his berth, I found himseated upon a chest with his head sunk upon his hands, rockinghimself to and fro. He is a big, powerful chap, clean-shaven, andvery swarthy--something like Aldrige, who helped us in the boguslaundry affair. He jumped up when he heard my business, and I had mywhistle to my lips to call a couple of river police, who were roundthe corner, but he seemed to have no heart in him, and he held outhis hands quietly enough for the darbies. We brought him along to thecells, and his box as well, for we thought there might be somethingincriminating; but, bar a big sharp knife such as most sailors have,we got nothing for our trouble. However, we find that we shall wantno more evidence, for on being brought before the inspector at thestation he asked leave to make a statement, which was, of course,taken down, just as he made it, by our shorthand man. We had threecopies typewritten, one of which I enclose. The affair proves, as Ialways thought it would, to be an extremely simple one, but I amobliged to you for assisting me in my investigation. With kindregards,"Yours very truly,"G. Lestrade.
"Hum! The investigation really was a very simple one," remarkedHolmes, "but I don't think it struck him in that light when he firstcalled us in. However, let us see what Jim Browner has to say forhimself. This is his statement as made before Inspector Montgomery atthe Shadwell Police Station, and it has the advantage of beingverbatim."
"'Have I anything to say? Yes, I have a deal to say. I have to make aclean breast of it all. You can hang me, or you can leave me alone. Idon't care a plug which you do. I tell you I've not shut an eye insleep since I did it, and I don't believe I ever will again until Iget past all waking. Sometimes it's his face, but most generally it'shers. I'm never without one or the other before me. He looks frowningand black-like, but she has a kind o' surprise upon her face. Ay, thewhite lamb, she might well be surprised when she read death on a facethat had seldom looked anything but love upon her before.
"'But it was Sarah's fault, and may the curse of a broken man put ablight on her and set the blood rotting in her veins! It's not that Iwant to clear myself. I know that I went back to drink, like thebeast that I was. But she would have forgiven me; she would havestuck as close to me as a rope to a block if that woman had neverdarkened our door. For Sarah Cushing loved me--that's the root of thebusiness--she loved me until all her love turned to poisonous hatewhen she knew that I thought more of my wife's footmark in the mudthan I did of her whole body and soul.
"'There were three sisters altogether. The old one was just a goodwoman, the second was a devil, and the third was an angel. Sarah wasthirty-three, and Mary was twenty-nine when I married. We were justas happy as the day was long when we set up house together, and inall Liverpool there was no better woman than my Mary. And then weasked Sarah up for a week, and the week grew into a month, and onething led to another, until she was just one of ourselves.
"'I was blue ribbon at that time, and we were putting a little moneyby, and all was as bright as a new dollar. My God, whoever would havethought that it could have come to this? Whoever would have dreamedit?
"'I used to be home for the week-ends very often, and sometimes ifthe ship were held back for cargo I would have a whole week at atime, and in this way I saw a deal of my sister-in-law, Sarah. Shewas a fine tall woman, black and quick and fierce, with a proud wayof carrying her head, and a glint from her eye like a spark from aflint. But when little Mary was there I had never a thought of her,and that I swear as I hope for God's mercy.
"'It had seemed to me sometimes that she liked to be alone with me,or to coax me out for a walk with her, but I had never thoughtanything of that. But one evening my eyes were opened. I had come upfrom the ship and found my wife out, but Sarah at home. "Where'sMary?" I asked. "Oh, she has gone to pay some accounts." I wasimpatient and paced up and down the room. "Can't you be happy forfive minutes without Mary, Jim?" says she. "It's a bad compliment tome that you can't be contented with my society for so short a time.""That's all right, my lass," said I, putting out my hand towards herin a kindly way, but she had it in both hers in an instant, and theyburned as if they were in a fever. I looked into her eyes and I readit all there. There was no need for her to speak, nor for me either.I frowned and drew my hand away. Then she stood by my side in silencefor a bit, and then put up her hand and patted me on the shoulder."Steady old Jim!" said she, and with a kind o' mocking laugh, she ranout of the room.
"'Well, from that time Sarah hated me with her whole heart and soul,and she is a woman who can hate, too. I was a fool to let her go onbiding with us--a besotted fool--but I never said a word to Mary, forI knew it would grieve her. Things went on much as before, but aftera time I began to find that there was a bit of a change in Maryherself. She had always been so trusting and so innocent, but now shebecame queer and suspicious, wanting to know where I had been andwhat I had been doing, and whom my letters were from, and what I hadin my pockets, and a thousand such follies. Day by day she grewqueerer and more irritable, and we had ceaseless rows about nothing.I was fairly puzzled by it all. Sarah avoided me now, but she andMary were just inseparable. I can see now how she was plotting andscheming and poisoning my wife's mind against me, but I was such ablind beetle that I could not understand it at the time. Then I brokemy blue ribbon and began to drink again, but I think I should nothave done it if Mary had been the same as ever. She had some reasonto be disgusted with me now, and the gap between us began to be widerand wider. And then this Alec Fairbairn chipped in, and things becamea thousand times blacker.
"'It was to see Sarah that he came to my house first, but soon it wasto see us, for he was a man with winning ways, and he made friendswherever he went. He was a dashing, swaggering chap, smart andcurled, who had seen half the world and could talk of what he hadseen. He was good company, I won't deny it, and he had wonderfulpolite ways with him for a sailor man, so that I think there musthave been a time when he knew more of the poop than the forecastle.For a month he was in and out of my house, and never once did itcross my mind that harm might come of his soft, tricky ways. And thenat last something made me suspect, and from that day my peace wasgone forever.
"'It was only a little thing, too. I had come into the parlourunexpected, and as I walked in at the door I saw a light of welcomeon my wife's face. But as she saw who it was it faded again, and sheturned away with a look of disappointment. That was enough for me.There was no one but Alec Fairbairn whose step she could havemistaken for mine. If I could have seen him then I should have killedhim, for I have always been like a madman when my temper gets loose.Mary saw the devil's light in my eyes, and she ran forward with herhands on my sleeve. "Don't, Jim, don't!" says she. "Where's Sarah?" Iasked. "In the kitchen," says she. "Sarah," says I as I went in,"this man Fairbairn is never to darken my door again." "Why not?"says she. "Because I order it." "Oh!" says she, "if my friends arenot good enough for this house, then I am not good enough for iteither." "You can do what you like," says I, "but if Fairbairn showshis face here again I'll send you one of his ears for a keepsake."She was frightened by my face, I think, for she never answered aword, and the same evening she left my house.
"'Well, I don't know now whether it was pure devilry on the part ofthis woman, or whether she thought that she could turn me against mywife by encouraging her to misbehave. Anyway, she took a house justtwo streets off and let lodgings to sailors. Fairbairn used to staythere, and Mary would go round to have tea with her sister and him.How often she went I don't know, but I followed her one day, and as Ibroke in at the door Fairbairn got away over the back garden wall,like the cowardly skunk that he was. I swore to my wife that I wouldkill her if I found her in his company again, and I led her back withme, sobbing and trembling, and as white as a piece of paper. Therewas no trace of love between us any longer. I could see that shehated me and feared me, and when the thought of it drove me to drink,then she despised me as well.
"'Well, Sarah found that she could not make a living in Liverpool, soshe went back, as I understand, to live with her sister in Croydon,and things jogged on much the same as ever at home. And then camethis week and all the misery and ruin.
"'It was in this way. We had gone on the May Day for a round voyageof seven days, but a hogshead got loose and started one of ourplates, so that we had to put back into port for twelve hours. I leftthe ship and came home, thinking what a surprise it would be for mywife, and hoping that maybe she would be glad to see me so soon. Thethought was in my head as I turned into my own street, and at thatmoment a cab passed me, and there she was, sitting by the side ofFairbairn, the two chatting and laughing, with never a thought for meas I stood watching them from the footpath.
"'I tell you, and I give you my word for it, that from that moment Iwas not my own master, and it is all like a dim dream when I lookback on it. I had been drinking hard of late, and the two thingstogether fairly turned my brain. There's something throbbing in myhead now, like a docker's hammer, but that morning I seemed to haveall Niagara whizzing and buzzing in my ears.
"'Well, I took to my heels, and I ran after the cab. I had a heavyoak stick in my hand, and I tell you I saw red from the first; but asI ran I got cunning, too, and hung back a little to see them withoutbeing seen. They pulled up soon at the railway station. There was agood crowd round the booking-office, so I got quite close to themwithout being seen. They took tickets for New Brighton. So did I, butI got in three carriages behind them. When we reached it they walkedalong the Parade, and I was never more than a hundred yards fromthem. At last I saw them hire a boat and start for a row, for it wasa very hot day, and they thought, no doubt, that it would be cooleron the water.
"'It was just as if they had been given into my hands. There was abit of a haze, and you could not see more than a few hundred yards. Ihired a boat for myself, and I pulled after them. I could see theblur of their craft, but they were going nearly as fast as I, andthey must have been a long mile from the shore before I caught themup. The haze was like a curtain all round us, and there were we threein the middle of it. My God, shall I ever forget their faces whenthey saw who was in the boat that was closing in upon them? Shescreamed out. He swore like a madman and jabbed at me with an oar,for he must have seen death in my eyes. I got past it and got one inwith my stick that crushed his head like an egg. I would have sparedher, perhaps, for all my madness, but she threw her arms round him,crying out to him, and calling him "Alec." I struck again, and shelay stretched beside him. I was like a wild beast then that hadtasted blood. If Sarah had been there, by the Lord, she should havejoined them. I pulled out my knife, and--well, there! I've saidenough. It gave me a kind of savage joy when I thought how Sarahwould feel when she had such signs as these of what her meddling hadbrought about. Then I tied the bodies into the boat, stove a plank,and stood by until they had sunk. I knew very well that the ownerwould think that they had lost their bearings in the haze, and haddrifted off out to sea. I cleaned myself up, got back to land, andjoined my ship without a soul having a suspicion of what had passed.That night I made up the packet for Sarah Cushing, and next day Isent it from Belfast.
"'There you have the whole truth of it. You can hang me, or do whatyou like with me, but you cannot punish me as I have been punishedalready. I cannot shut my eyes but I see those two faces staring atme--staring at me as they stared when my boat broke through the haze.I killed them quick, but they are killing me slow; and if I haveanother night of it I shall be either mad or dead before morning. Youwon't put me alone into a cell, sir?  For pity's sake don't, and mayyou be treated in your day of agony as you treat me now.'
"What is the meaning of it, Watson?" said Holmes solemnly as he laiddown the paper. "What object is served by this circle of misery andviolence and fear? It must tend to some end, or else our universe isruled by chance, which is unthinkable. But what end? There is thegreat standing perennial problem to which human reason is as far froman answer as ever."





                    THE ADVENTURE OF THE RED CIRCLE




                           Table of contents   Part One   Part Two














     CHAPTER I     Part One

"Well, Mrs. Warren, I cannot see that you have any particular causefor uneasiness, nor do I understand why I, whose time is of somevalue, should interfere in the matter. I really have other things toengage me." So spoke Sherlock Holmes and turned back to the greatscrapbook in which he was arranging and indexing some of his recentmaterial.
But the landlady had the pertinacity and also the cunning of her sex. She held her ground firmly.
"You arranged an affair for a lodger of mine last year," shesaid--"Mr. Fairdale Hobbs."
"Ah, yes--a simple matter."
"But he would never cease talking of it--your kindness, sir, and theway in which you brought light into the darkness. I remembered hiswords when I was in doubt and darkness myself. I know you could ifyou only would."
Holmes was accessible upon the side of flattery, and also, to do himjustice, upon the side of kindliness. The two forces made him laydown his gum-brush with a sigh of resignation and push back hischair.
"Well, well, Mrs. Warren, let us hear about it, then.  You don'tobject to tobacco, I take it? Thank you, Watson--the matches! You areuneasy, as I understand, because your new lodger remains in his roomsand you cannot see him. Why, bless you, Mrs. Warren, if I were yourlodger you often would not see me for weeks on end."
"No doubt, sir; but this is different. It frightens me, Mr. Holmes. Ican't sleep for fright. To hear his quick step moving here and movingthere from early morning to late at night, and yet never to catch somuch as a glimpse of him--it's more than I can stand. My husband isas nervous over it as I am, but he is out at his work all day, whileI get no rest from it. What is he hiding for? What has he done?Except for the girl, I am all alone in the house with him, and it'smore than my nerves can stand."
Holmes leaned forward and laid his long, thin fingers upon thewoman's shoulder. He had an almost hypnotic power of soothing when hewished. The scared look faded from her eyes, and her agitatedfeatures smoothed into their usual commonplace. She sat down in thechair which he had indicated.
"If I take it up I must understand every detail," said he. "Take timeto consider. The smallest point may be the most essential. You saythat the man came ten days ago and paid you for a fortnight's boardand lodging?"
"He asked my terms, sir. I said fifty shillings a week. There is asmall sitting-room and bedroom, and all complete, at the top of thehouse."
"Well?"
"He said, 'I'll pay you five pounds a week if I can have it on my ownterms.' I'm a poor woman, sir, and Mr. Warren earns little, and themoney meant much to me. He took out a ten-pound note, and he held itout to me then and there. 'You can have the same every fortnight fora long time to come if you keep the terms,' he said. 'If not, I'llhave no more to do with you.'
"What were the terms?"
"Well, sir, they were that he was to have a key of the house. Thatwas all right. Lodgers often have them. Also, that he was to be leftentirely to himself and never, upon any excuse, to be disturbed."
"Nothing wonderful in that, surely?"
"Not in reason, sir. But this is out of all reason. He has been therefor ten days, and neither Mr. Warren, nor I, nor the girl has onceset eyes upon him. We can hear that quick step of his pacing up anddown, up and down, night, morning, and noon; but except on that firstnight he had never once gone out of the house."
"Oh, he went out the first night, did he?"
"Yes, sir, and returned very late--after we were all in bed. He toldme after he had taken the rooms that he would do so and asked me notto bar the door. I heard him come up the stair after midnight."
"But his meals?"
"It was his particular direction that we should always, when he rang,leave his meal upon a chair, outside his door. Then he rings againwhen he has finished, and we take it down from the same chair. If hewants anything else he prints it on a slip of paper and leaves it."
"Prints it?"
"Yes, sir; prints it in pencil. Just the word, nothing more. Here'sthe one I brought to show you--soap. Here's another--match. This isone he left the first morning--daily gazette. I leave that paper withhis breakfast every morning."
"Dear me, Watson," said Homes, staring with great curiosity at theslips of foolscap which the landlady had handed to him, "this iscertainly a little unusual. Seclusion I can understand; but whyprint? Printing is a clumsy process. Why not write? What would itsuggest, Watson?"
"That he desired to conceal his handwriting."
"But why? What can it matter to him that his landlady should have aword of his writing? Still, it may be as you say. Then, again, whysuch laconic messages?"
"I cannot imagine."
"It opens a pleasing field for intelligent speculation. The words arewritten with a broad-pointed, violet-tinted pencil of a not unusualpattern. You will observe that the paper is torn away at the sidehere after the printing was done, so that the 's' of 'soap' is partlygone. Suggestive, Watson, is it not?"
"Of caution?"
"Exactly. There was evidently some mark, some thumbprint, somethingwhich might give a clue to the person's identity. Now. Mrs. Warren,you say that the man was of middle size, dark, and bearded. What agewould he be?"
"Youngish, sir--not over thirty."
"Well, can you give me no further indications?"
"He spoke good English, sir, and yet I thought he was a foreigner byhis accent."
"And he was well dressed?"
"Very smartly dressed, sir--quite the gentleman. Darkclothes--nothing you would note."
"He gave no name?"
"No, sir."
"And has had no letters or callers?"
"None."
"But surely you or the girl enter his room of a morning?"
"No, sir; he looks after himself entirely."
"Dear me! that is certainly remarkable. What about his luggage?"
"He had one big brown bag with him--nothing else."
"Well, we don't seem to have much material to help us. Do you saynothing has come out of that room--absolutely nothing?"
The landlady drew an envelope from her bag; from it she shook out twoburnt matches and a cigarette-end upon the table.
"They were on his tray this morning. I brought them because I hadheard that you can read great things out of small ones."
Holmes shrugged his shoulders.
"There is nothing here," said he. "The matches have, of course, beenused to light cigarettes. That is obvious from the shortness of theburnt end. Half the match is consumed in lighting a pipe or cigar.But, dear me! this cigarette stub is certainly remarkable. Thegentleman was bearded and moustached, you say?"
"Yes, sir."
"I don't understand that. I should say that only a clean-shaven mancould have smoked this. Why, Watson, even your modest moustache wouldhave been singed."
"A holder?" I suggested.
"No, no; the end is matted. I suppose there could not be two peoplein your rooms, Mrs. Warren?"
"No, sir. He eats so little that I often wonder it can keep life inone."
"Well, I think we must wait for a little more material. After all,you have nothing to complain of. You have received your rent, and heis not a troublesome lodger, though he is certainly an unusual one.He pays you well, and if he chooses to lie concealed it is no directbusiness of yours. We have no excuse for an intrusion upon hisprivacy until we have some reason to think that there is a guiltyreason for it. I've taken up the matter, and I won't lose sight ofit. Report to me if anything fresh occurs, and rely upon myassistance if it should be needed.
"There are certainly some points of interest in this case, Watson,"he remarked when the landlady had left us. "It may, of course, betrivial--individual eccentricity; or it may be very much deeper thanappears on the surface. The first thing that strike one is theobvious possibility that the person now in the rooms may be entirelydifferent from the one who engaged them."
"Why should you think so?"
"Well, apart form this cigarette-end, was it not suggestive that theonly time the lodger went out was immediately after his taking therooms? He came back--or someone came back--when all witnesses wereout of the way. We have no proof that the person who came back wasthe person who went out. Then, again, the man who took the roomsspoke English well. This other, however, prints 'match' when itshould have been 'matches.' I can imagine that the word was taken outof a dictionary, which would give the noun but not the plural. Thelaconic style may be to conceal the absence of knowledge of English.Yes, Watson, there are good reasons to suspect that there has been asubstitution of lodgers."
"But for what possible end?"
"Ah! there lies our problem. There is one rather obvious line ofinvestigation." He took down the great book in which, day by day, hefiled the agony columns of the various London journals. "Dear me!"said he, turning over the pages, "what a chorus of groans, cries, andbleatings! What a rag-bag of singular happenings! But surely the mostvaluable hunting-ground that ever was given to a student of theunusual! This person is alone and cannot be approached by letterwithout a breach of that absolute secrecy which is desired. How isany news or any message to reach him from without? Obviously byadvertisement through a newspaper. There seems no other way, andfortunately we need concern ourselves with the one paper only. Hereare the Daily Gazette extracts of the last fortnight. 'Lady with ablack boa at Prince's Skating Club'--that we may pass. 'Surely Jimmywill not break his mother's heart'--that appears to be irrelevant.'If the lady who fainted on Brixton bus'--she does not interest me.'Every day my heart longs--' Bleat, Watson--unmitigated bleat! Ah,this is a little more possible. Listen to this: 'Be patient. Willfind some sure means of communications. Meanwhile, this column. G.'That is two days after Mrs. Warren's lodger arrived. It soundsplausible, does it not? The mysterious one could understand English,even if he could not print it. Let us see if we can pick up the traceagain. Yes, here we are--three days later. 'Am making successfularrangements. Patience and prudence. The clouds will pass. G.'Nothing for a week after that. Then comes something much moredefinite: 'The path is clearing. If I find chance signal messageremember code agreed--One A, two B, and so on. You will hear soon.G.' That was in yesterday's paper, and there is nothing in to-day's.It's all very appropriate to Mrs. Warren's lodger. If we wait alittle, Watson, I don't doubt that the affair will grow moreintelligible."
So it proved; for in the morning I found my friend standing on thehearthrug with his back to the fire and a smile of completesatisfaction upon his face.
"How's this, Watson?" he cried, picking up the paper from the table."'High red house with white stone facings. Third floor. Second windowleft. After dusk. G.' That is definite enough. I think afterbreakfast we must make a little reconnaissance of Mrs. Warren'sneighbourhood. Ah, Mrs. Warren! what news do you bring us thismorning?"
Our client had suddenly burst into the room with an explosive energywhich told of some new and momentous development.
"It's a police matter, Mr. Holmes!" she cried. "I'll have no more ofit! He shall pack out of there with his baggage. I would have gonestraight up and told him so, only I thought it was but fair to you totake your opinion first. But I'm at the end of my patience, and whenit comes to knocking my old man about--"
"Knocking Mr. Warren about?"
"Using him roughly, anyway."
"But who used him roughly?"
"Ah! that's what we want to know! It was this morning, sir. Mr.Warren is a timekeeper at Morton and Waylight's, in Tottenham CourtRoad. He has to be out of the house before seven. Well, this morninghe had not gone ten paces down the road when two men came up behindhim, threw a coat over his head, and bundled him into a cab that wasbeside the curb. They drove him an hour, and then opened the door andshot him out. He lay in the roadway so shaken in his wits that henever saw what became of the cab. When he picked himself up he foundhe was on Hampstead Heath; so he took a bus home, and there he liesnow on his sofa, while I came straight round to tell you what hadhappened."
"Most interesting," said Holmes. "Did he observe the appearance ofthese men--did he hear them talk?"
"No; he is clean dazed. He just knows that he was lifted up as if bymagic and dropped as if by magic. Two a least were in it, and maybethree."
"And you connect this attack with your lodger?"
"Well, we've lived there fifteen years and no such happenings evercame before. I've had enough of him. Money's not everything. I'llhave him out of my house before the day is done."
"Wait a bit, Mrs. Warren. Do nothing rash. I begin to think that thisaffair may be very much more important than appeared at first sight.It is clear now that some danger is threatening your lodger. It isequally clear that his enemies, lying in wait for him near your door,mistook your husband for him in the foggy morning light. Ondiscovering their mistake they released him. What they would havedone had it not been a mistake, we can only conjecture."
"Well, what am I to do, Mr. Holmes?"
"I have a great fancy to see this lodger of yours, Mrs. Warren."
"I don't see how that is to be managed, unless you break in the door.I always hear him unlock it as I go down the stair after I leave thetray."
"He has to take the tray in. Surely we could conceal ourselves andsee him do it."
The landlady thought for a moment.
"Well, sir, there's the box-room opposite. I could arrange alooking-glass, maybe, and if you were behind the door--"
"Excellent!" said Holmes. "When does he lunch?"
"About one, sir."
"Then Dr. Watson and I will come round in time. For the present, Mrs.Warren, good-bye."
At half-past twelve we found ourselves upon the steps of Mrs.Warren's house--a high, thin, yellow-brick edifice in Great OrmeStreet, a narrow thoroughfare at the northeast side of the BritishMuseum. Standing as it does near the corner of the street, itcommands a view down Howe Street, with its ore pretentious houses.Holmes pointed with a chuckle to one of these, a row of residentialflats, which projected so that they could not fail to catch the eye.
"See, Watson!" said he. "'High red house with stone facings.' Thereis the signal station all right. We know the place, and we know thecode; so surely our task should be simple. There's a 'to let' card inthat window. It is evidently an empty flat to which the confederatehas access. Well, Mrs. Warren, what now?"
"I have it all ready for you. If you will both come up and leave yourboots below on the landing, I'll put you there now."
It was an excellent hiding-place which she had arranged. The mirrorwas so placed that, seated in the dark, we could very plainly see thedoor opposite. We had hardly settled down in it, and Mrs. Warren leftus, when a distant tinkle announced that our mysterious neighbour hadrung. Presently the landlady appeared with the tray, laid it downupon a chair beside the closed door, and then, treading heavily,departed. Crouching together in the angle of the door, we kept oureyes fixed upon the mirror. Suddenly, as the landlady's footstepsdied away, there was the creak of a turning key, the handle revolved,and two thin hands darted out and lifted the tray form the chair. Aninstant later it was hurriedly replaced, and I caught a glimpse of adark, beautiful, horrified face glaring at the narrow opening of thebox-room. Then the door crashed to, the key turned once more, and allwas silence. Holmes twitched my sleeve, and together we stole downthe stair.
"I will call again in the evening," said he to the expectantlandlady. "I think, Watson, we can discuss this business better inour own quarters."
"My surmise, as you saw, proved to be correct," said he, speakingfrom the depths of his easy-chair. "There has been a substitution oflodgers. What I did not foresee is that we should find a woman, andno ordinary woman, Watson."
"She saw us."
"Well, she saw something to alarm her. That is certain. The generalsequence of events is pretty clear, is it not? A couple seek refugein London from a very terrible and instant danger. The measure ofthat danger is the rigour of their precautions. The man, who has somework which he must do, desires to leave the woman in absolute safetywhile he does it. It is not an easy problem, but he solved it in anoriginal fashion, and so effectively that her presence was not evenknown to the landlady who supplies her with food. The printedmessages, as is now evident, were to prevent her sex being discoveredby her writing. The man cannot come near the woman, or he will guidetheir enemies to her. Since he cannot communicate with her direct, hehas recourse to the agony column of a paper. So far all is clear."
"But what is at the root of it?"
"Ah, yes, Watson--severely practical, as usual! What is at the rootof it all? Mrs. Warren's whimsical problem enlarges somewhat andassumes a more sinister aspect as we proceed. This much we can say:that it is no ordinary love escapade. You saw the woman's face at thesign of danger. We have heard, too, of the attack upon the landlord,which was undoubtedly meant for the lodger. These alarms, and thedesperate need for secrecy, argue that the matter is one of life ordeath. The attack upon Mr. Warren further shows that the enemy,whoever they are, are themselves not aware of the substitution of thefemale lodger for the male. It is very curious and complex, Watson."
"Why should you go further in it? What have you to gain from it?"
"What, indeed? It is art for art's sake, Watson. I suppose when youdoctored you found yourself studying cases without thought of a fee?"
"For my education, Holmes."
"Education never ends, Watson. It is a series of lessons with thegreatest for the last. This is an instructive case. There is neithermoney nor credit in it, and yet one would wish to tidy it up. Whendusk comes we should find ourselves one stage advanced in ourinvestigation."
When we returned to Mrs. Warren's rooms, the gloom of a London winterevening had thickened into one gray curtain, a dead monotone ofcolour, broken only by the sharp yellow squares of the windows andthe blurred haloes of the gas-lamps. As we peered from the darkenedsitting-room of the lodging-house, one more dim light glimmered highup through the obscurity.
"Someone is moving in that room," said Holmes in a whisper, his gauntand eager face thrust forward to the window-pane. "Yes, I can see hisshadow. There he is again! He has a candle in his hand. Now he ispeering across. He wants to be sure that she is on the lookout. Nowhe begins to flash. Take the message also, Watson, that we may checkeach other. A single flash--that is A, surely. Now, then. How manydid you make it? Twenty. Do did In. That should mean T. AT--that'sintelligible enough. Another T. Surely this is the beginning of asecond word. Now, then--TENTA. Dead stop. That can't be all, Watson?ATTENTA gives no sense. Nor is it any better as three words AT, TEN,TA, unless T. A. are a person's initials. There it goes again! What'sthat? ATTE--why, it is the same message over again. Curious, Watson,very curious. Now he is off once more! AT--why he is repeating it forthe third time. ATTENTA three times! How often will he repeat it? No,that seems to be the finish. He has withdrawn form the window. Whatdo you make of it, Watson?"
"A cipher message, Holmes."
My companion gave a sudden chuckle of comprehension. "And not a veryobscure cipher, Watson," said he. "Why, of course, it is Italian! TheA means that it is addressed to a woman. 'Beware! Beware! Beware!'How's that, Watson?
"I believe you have hit it."
"Not a doubt of it. It is a very urgent message, thrice repeated tomake it more so. But beware of what? Wait a bit, he is coming to thewindow once more."
Again we saw the dim silhouette of a crouching man and the whisk ofthe small flame across the window as the signals were renewed. Theycame more rapidly than before--so rapid that it was hard to followthem.
"PERICOLO--pericolo--eh, what's that, Watson? 'Danger,' isn't it?Yes, by Jove, it's a danger signal. There he goes again! PERI.Halloa, what on earth--"
The light had suddenly gone out, the glimmering square of window haddisappeared, and the third floor formed a dark band round the loftybuilding, with its tiers of shining casements. That last warning cryhad been suddenly cut short. How, and by whom? The same thoughtoccurred on the instant to us both. Holmes sprang up from where hecrouched by the window.
"This is serious, Watson," he cried. "There is some devilry goingforward! Why should such a message stop in such a way? I should putScotland Yard in touch with this business--and yet, it is toopressing for us to leave."
"Shall I go for the police?"
"We must define the situation a little more clearly. It may bear somemore innocent interpretation. Come, Watson, let us go acrossourselves and see what we can make of it."




     CHAPTER II     Part Two

As we walked rapidly down Howe Street I glanced back at the buildingwhich we had left. There, dimly outlined at the top window, I couldsee the shadow of a head, a woman's head, gazing tensely, rigidly,out into the night, waiting with breathless suspense for the renewalof that interrupted message. At the doorway of the Howe Street flatsa man, muffled in a cravat and greatcoat, was leaning against therailing. He started as the hall-light fell upon our faces.
"Holmes!" he cried.
"Why, Gregson!" said my companion as he shook hands with the ScotlandYard detective. "Journeys end with lovers' meetings. What brings youhere?"
"The same reasons that bring you, I expect," said Gregson. "How yougot on to it I can't imagine."
"Different threads, but leading up to the same tangle. I've beentaking the signals."
"Signals?"
"Yes, from that window. They broke off in the middle. We came over tosee the reason. But since it is safe in your hands I see no object incontinuing this business."
"Wait a bit!" cried Gregson eagerly. "I'll do you this justice, Mr.Holmes, that I was never in a case yet that I didn't feel strongerfor having you on my side. There's only the one exit to these flats,so we have him safe."
"Who is he?"
"Well, well, we score over you for once, Mr. Holmes. You must give usbest this time." He struck his stick sharply upon the ground, onwhich a cabman, his whip in his hand, sauntered over from afour-wheeler which stood on the far side of the street. "May Iintroduce you to Mr. Sherlock Holmes?" he said to the cabman. "Thisis Mr. Leverton, of Pinkerton's American Agency."
"The hero of the Long Island cave mystery?" said Holmes. "Sir, I ampleased to meet you."
The American, a quiet, businesslike young man, with a clean-shaven,hatchet face, flushed up at the words of commendation. "I am on thetrail of my life now, Mr. Holmes," said he. "If I can get Gorgiano--"
"What! Gorgiano of the Red Circle?"
"Oh, he has a European fame, has he? Well, we've learned all abouthim in America. We know he is at the bottom of fifty murders, and yetwe have nothing positive we can take him on. I tracked him over fromNew York, and I've been close to him for a week in London, waitingsome excuse to get my hand on his collar. Mr. Gregson and I ran himto ground in that big tenement house, and there's only one door, sohe can't slip us. There's three folk come out since he went in, butI'll swear he wasn't one of them."
"Mr. Holmes talks of signals," said Gregson. "I expect, as usual, heknows a good deal that we don't."
In a few clear words Holmes explained the situation as it hadappeared to us. The American struck his hands together with vexation.
"He's on to us!" he cried.
"Why do you think so?"
"Well, it figures out that way, does it not? Here he is, sending outmessages to an accomplice--there are several of his gang in London.Then suddenly, just as by your own account he was telling them thatthere was danger, he broke short off. What could it mean except thatfrom the window he had suddenly either caught sight of us in thestreet, or in some way come to understand how close the danger was,and that he must act right away if he was to avoid it? What do yousuggest, Mr. Holmes?"
"That we go up at once and see for ourselves."
"But we have no warrant for his arrest."
"He is in unoccupied premises under suspicious circumstances," saidGregson. "That is good enough for the moment. When we have him by theheels we can see if New York can't help us to keep him. I'll take theresponsibility of arresting him now."
Our official detectives may blunder in the matter of intelligence,but never in that of courage. Gregson climbed the stair to arrestthis desperate murderer with the same absolutely quiet andbusinesslike bearing with which he would have ascended the officialstaircase of Scotland Yard. The Pinkerton man had tried to push pasthim, but Gregson had firmly elbowed him back. London dangers were theprivilege of the London force.
The door of the left-hand flat upon the third landing was standingajar. Gregson pushed it open. Within all was absolute silence anddarkness. I struck a match and lit the detective's lantern. As I didso, and as the flicker steadied into a flame, we all gave a gasp ofsurprise. On the deal boards of the carpetless floor there wasoutlined a fresh track of blood. The red steps pointed towards us andled away from an inner room, the door of which was closed. Gregsonflung it open and held his light full blaze in front of him, while weall peered eagerly over his shoulders.
In the middle of the floor of the empty room was huddled the figureof an enormous man, his clean-shaven, swarthy face grotesquelyhorrible in its contortion and his head encircled by a ghastlycrimson halo of blood, lying in a broad wet circle upon the whitewoodwork. His knees were drawn up, his hands thrown out in agony, andfrom the centre of his broad, brown, upturned throat there projectedthe white haft of a knife driven blade-deep into his body. Giant ashe was, the man must have gone down like a pole-axed ox before thatterrific blow. Beside his right hand a most formidable horn-handled,two-edged dagger lay upon the floor, and near it a black kid glove.
"By George! it's Black Gorgiano himself!" cried the Americandetective. "Someone has got ahead of us this time."
"Here is the candle in the window, Mr. Holmes," said Gregson. "Why,whatever are you doing?"
Holmes had stepped across, had lit the candle, and was passing itbackward and forward across the window-panes. Then he peered into thedarkness, blew the candle out, and threw it on the floor.
"I rather think that will be helpful," said he. He came over andstood in deep thought while the two professionals were examining thebody. "You say that three people came out form the flat while youwere waiting downstairs," said he at last. "Did you observe themclosely?"
"Yes, I did."
"Was there a fellow about thirty, black-bearded, dark, of middlesize?"
"Yes; he was the last to pass me."
"That is your man, I fancy. I can give you his description, and wehave a very excellent outline of his footmark. That should be enoughfor you."
"Not much, Mr. Holmes, among the millions of London."
"Perhaps not. That is why I thought it best to summon this lady toyour aid."
We all turned round at the words. There, framed in the doorway, was atall and beautiful woman--the mysterious lodger of Bloomsbury. Slowlyshe advanced, her face pale and drawn with a frightful apprehension,her eyes fixed and staring, her terrified gaze riveted upon the darkfigure on the floor.
"You have killed him!" she muttered. "Oh, Dio mio, you have killedhim!" Then I heard a sudden sharp intake of her breath, and shesprang into the air with a cry of joy. Round and round the room shedanced, her hands clapping, her dark eyes gleaming with delightedwonder, and a thousand pretty Italian exclamations pouring from herlips. It was terrible and amazing to see such a woman so convulsedwith joy at such a sight. Suddenly she stopped and gazed at us allwith a questioning stare.
"But you! You are police, are you not? You have killed GiuseppeGorgiano. Is it not so?"
"We are police, madam."
She looked round into the shadows of the room.
"But where, then, is Gennaro?" she asked. "He is my husband, GennaroLucca. I am Emilia Lucca, and we are both from New York. Where isGennaro? He called me this moment from this window, and I ran withall my speed."
"It was I who called," said Holmes.
"You! How could you call?"
"Your cipher was not difficult, madam. Your presence here wasdesirable. I knew that I had only to flash 'Vieni' and you wouldsurely come."
The beautiful Italian looked with awe at my companion.
"I do not understand how you know these things," she said. "GiuseppeGorgiano--how did he--" She paused, and then suddenly her face lit upwith pride and delight. "Now I see it! My Gennaro! My splendid,beautiful Gennaro, who has guarded me safe from all harm, he did it,with his own strong hand he killed the monster! Oh, Gennaro, howwonderful you are! What woman could every be worthy of such a man?"
"Well, Mrs. Lucca," said the prosaic Gregson, laying his hand uponthe lady's sleeve with as little sentiment as if she were a NottingHill hooligan, "I am not very clear yet who you are or what you are;but you've said enough to make it very clear that we shall want youat the Yard."
"One moment, Gregson," said Holmes. "I rather fancy that this ladymay be as anxious to give us information as we can be to get it. Youunderstand, madam, that your husband will be arrested and tried forthe death of the man who lies before us? What you say may be used inevidence. But if you think that he has acted from motives which arenot criminal, and which he would wish to have known, then you cannotserve him better than by telling us the whole story."
"Now that Gorgiano is dead we fear nothing," said the lady. "He was adevil and a monster, and there can be no judge in the world who wouldpunish my husband for having killed him."
"In that case," said Holmes, "my suggestion is that we lock thisdoor, leave things as we found them, go with this lady to her room,and form our opinion after we have heard what it is that she has tosay to us."
Half an hour later we were seated, all four, in the smallsitting-room of Signora Lucca, listening to her remarkable narrativeof those sinister events, the ending of which we had chanced towitness. She spoke in rapid and fluent but very unconventionalEnglish, which, for the sake of clearness, I will make grammatical.
"I was born in Posilippo, near Naples," said she, "and was thedaughter of Augusto Barelli, who was the chief lawyer and once thedeputy of that part. Gennaro was in my father's employment, and Icame to love him, as any woman must. He had neither money norposition--nothing but his beauty and strength and energy--so myfather forbade the match. We fled together, were married at Bari, andsold my jewels to gain the money which would take us to America. Thiswas four years ago, and we have been in New York ever since.
"Fortune was very good to us at first. Gennaro was able to do aservice to an Italian gentleman--he saved him from some ruffians inthe place called the Bowery, and so made a powerful friend. His namewas Tito Castalotte, and he was the senior partner of the great firmof Castalotte and Zamba, who are the chief fruit importers of NewYork. Signor Zamba is an invalid, and our new friend Castalotte hasall power within the firm, which employs more than three hundred men.He took my husband into his employment, made him head of adepartment, and showed his good-will towards him in every way. SignorCastalotte was a bachelor, and I believe that he felt as if Gennarowas his son, and both my husband and I loved him as if he were ourfather. We had taken and furnished a little house in Brooklyn, andour whole future seemed assured when that black cloud appeared whichwas soon to overspread our sky.
"One night, when Gennaro returned from his work, he brought afellow-countryman back with him. His name was Gorgiano, and he hadcome also from Posilippo. He was a huge man, as you can testify, foryou have looked upon his corpse. Not only was his body that of agiant but everything about him was grotesque, gigantic, andterrifying. His voice was like thunder in our little house. There wasscarce room for the whirl of his great arms as he talked. Histhoughts, his emotions, his passions, all were exaggerated andmonstrous. He talked, or rather roared, with such energy that otherscould but sit and listen, cowed with the mighty stream of words. Hiseyes blazed at you and held you at his mercy. He was a terrible andwonderful man. I thank God that he is dead!
"He came again and again. Yet I was aware that Gennaro was no morehappy than I was in his presence. My poor husband would sit pale andlistless, listening to the endless raving upon politics and uponsocial questions which made up or visitor's conversation. Gennarosaid nothing, but I, who knew him so well, could read in his facesome emotion which I had never seen there before. At first I thoughtthat it was dislike. And then, gradually, I understood that it wasmore than dislike. It was fear--a deep, secret, shrinking fear. Thatnight--the night that I read his terror--I put my arms round him andI implored him by his love for me and by all that he held dear tohold nothing from me, and to tell me why this huge man overshadowedhim so.
"He told me, and my own heart grew cold as ice as I listened. My poorGennaro, in his wild and fiery days, when all the world seemedagainst him and his mind was driven half mad by the injustices oflife, had joined a Neapolitan society, the Red Circle, which wasallied to the old Carbonari. The oaths and secrets of thisbrotherhood were frightful, but once within its rule no escape waspossible. When we had fled to America Gennaro thought that he hadcast it all off forever. What was his horror one evening to meet inthe streets the very man who had initiated him in Naples, the giantGorgiano, a man who had earned the name of 'Death' in the south ofItaly, for he was red to the elbow in murder! He had come to New Yorkto avoid the Italian police, and he had already planted a branch ofthis dreadful society in his new home. All this Gennaro told me andshowed me a summons which he had received that very day, a Red Circledrawn upon the head of it telling him that a lodge would be held upona certain date, and that his presence at it was required and ordered.
"That was bad enough, but worse was to come. I had noticed for sometime that when Gorgiano came to us, as he constantly did, in theevening, he spoke much to me; and even when his words were to myhusband those terrible, glaring, wild-beast eyes of his were alwaysturned upon me. One night his secret came out. I had awakened what hecalled 'love' within him--the love of a brute--a savage. Gennaro hadnot yet returned when he came. He pushed his way in, seized me in hismighty arms, hugged me in his bear's embrace, covered me with kisses,and implored me to come away with him. I was struggling and screamingwhen Gennaro entered and attacked him. He struck Gennaro senselessand fled from the house which he was never more to enter. It was adeadly enemy that we made that night.
"A few days later came the meeting. Gennaro returned from it with aface which told me that something dreadful had occurred. It was worsethan we could have imagined possible. The funds of the society wereraised by blackmailing rich Italians and threatening them withviolence should they refuse the money. It seems that Castalotte, ourdear friend and benefactor, had been approached. He had refused toyield to threats, and he had handed the notices to the police. It wasresolved now that such an example should be made of them as wouldprevent any other victim from rebelling. At the meeting it wasarranged that he and his house should be blown up with dynamite.There was a drawing of lots as to who should carry out the deed.Gennaro saw our enemy's cruel face smiling at him as he dipped hishand in the bag. No doubt it had been prearranged in some fashion,for it was the fatal disc with the Red Circle upon it, the mandatefor murder, which lay upon his palm. He was to kill his best friend,or he was to expose himself and me to the vengeance of his comrades.It was part of their fiendish system to punish those whom they fearedor hated by injuring not only their own persons but those whom theyloved, and it was the knowledge of this which hung as a terror overmy poor Gennaro's head and drove him nearly crazy with apprehension.
"All that night we sat together, our arms round each other, eachstrengthening each for the troubles that lay before us. The very nextevening had been fixed for the attempt. By midday my husband and Iwere on our way to London, but not before he had given our benefactorfull warning of this danger, and had also left such information forthe police as would safeguard his life for the future.
"The rest, gentlemen, you know for yourselves. We were sure that ourenemies would be behind us like our own shadows. Gorgiano had hisprivate reasons for vengeance, but in any case we knew how ruthless,cunning, and untiring he could be. Both Italy and America are full ofstories of his dreadful powers. If ever they were exerted it would benow. My darling made use of the few clear days which our start hadgiven us in arranging for a refuge for me in such a fashion that nopossible danger could reach me. For his own part, he wished to befree that he might communicate both with the American and with theItalian police. I do not myself know where he lived, or how. All thatI learned was through the columns of a newspaper. But once as Ilooked through my window, I saw two Italians watching the house, andI understood that in some way Gorgiano had found our retreat. FinallyGennaro told me, through the paper, that he would signal to me from acertain window, but when the signals came they were nothing butwarnings, which were suddenly interrupted. It is very clear to me nowthat he knew Gorgiano to be close upon him, and that, thank God! hewas ready for him when he came. And now, gentleman, I would ask youwhether we have anything to fear from the law, or whether any judgeupon earth would condemn my Gennaro for what he has done?"
"Well, Mr. Gregson," said the American, looking across at theofficial, "I don't know what your British point of view may be, but Iguess that in New York this lady's husband will receive a prettygeneral vote of thanks."
"She will have to come with me and see the chief," Gregson answered. "If what she says is corroborated, I do not think she or her husbandhas much to fear.  But what I can't make head or tail of, Mr. Holmes,is how on earth you got yourself mixed up in the matter."
"Education, Gregson, education.  Still seeking knowledge at the olduniversity.  Well, Watson, you have one more specimen of the tragicand grotesque to add to your collection.  By the way, it is not eighto'clock, and a Wagner night at Covent Garden!  If we hurry, we mightbe in time for the second act."





              THE ADVENTURE OF THE BRUCE-PARTINGTON PLANS
In the third week of November, in the year 1895, a dense yellow fogsettled down upon London. From the Monday to the Thursday I doubtwhether it was ever possible from our windows in Baker Street to seethe loom of the opposite houses. The first day Holmes had spent incross-indexing his huge book of references. The second and third hadbeen patiently occupied upon a subject which he hand recently madehis hobby--the music of the Middle Ages. But when, for the fourthtime, after pushing back our chairs from breakfast we saw the greasy,heavy brown swirl still drifting past us and condensing in oily dropsupon the window-panes, my comrade's impatient and active nature couldendure this drab existence no longer. He paced restlessly about oursitting-room in a fever of suppressed energy, biting his nails,tapping the furniture, and chafing against inaction.
"Nothing of interest in the paper, Watson?" he said.
In was aware that by anything of interest, Holmes meant anything ofcriminal interest. There was the news of a revolution, of a possiblewar, and of an impending change of government; but these did not comewithin the horizon of my companion. I could see nothing recorded inthe shape of crime which was not commonplace and futile. Holmesgroaned and resumed hs restless meanderings.
"The London criminal is certainly a dull fellow," said he in thequerulous voice of the sportsman whose game has failed him. "Look outthis window, Watson. See how the figures loom up, are dimly seen, andthen blend once more into the cloud-bank. The thief or the murderercould roam London on such a day as the tiger does the jungle, unseenuntil he pounces, and then evident only to his victim."
"There have," said I, "been numerous petty thefts."
Holmes snorted his contempt.
"This great and sombre stage is set for something more worthy thanthat," said he. "It is fortunate for this community that I am not acriminal."
"It is, indeed!" said I heartily.
"Suppose that I were Brooks or Woodhouse, or any of the fifty men whohave good reason for taking my life, how long could I survive againstmy own pursuit? A summons, a bogus appointment, and all would beover. It is well they don't have days of fog in the Latincountries--the countries of assassination. By Jove! here comessomething at last to break our dead monotony."
It was the maid with a telegram. Holmes tore it open and burst outlaughing.
"Well, well! What next?" said he. "Brother Mycroft is coming round."
"Why not?" I asked.
"Why not? It is as if you met a tram-car coming down a country lane.Mycroft has his rails and he runs on them. His Pall Mall lodgings,the Diogenes Club, Whitehall--that is his cycle. Once, and only once,he has been here. What upheaval can possibly have derailed him?"
"Does he not explain?"
Holmes handed me his brother's telegram.
Must see you over Cadogen West. Coming at once.Mycroft.
"Cadogen West? I have heard the name."
"It recalls nothing to my mind. But that Mycroft should break out inthis erratic fashion! A planet might as well leave its orbit. By theway, do you know what Mycroft is?"
I had some vague recollection of an explanation at the time of theAdventure of the Greek Interpreter.
"You told me that he had some small office under the Britishgovernment."
Holmes chuckled.
"I did not know you quite so well in those days. One has to bediscreet when one talks of high matters of state. You are right inthinking that he under the British government. You would also beright in a sense if you said that occasionally he is the Britishgovernment."
"My dear Holmes!"
"I thought I might surprise you. Mycroft draws four hundred and fiftypounds a year, remains a subordinate, has no ambitions of any kind,will receive neither honour nor title, but remains the mostindispensable man in the country."
"But how?"
"Well, his position is unique. He has made it for himself. There hasnever been anything like it before, nor will be again. He has thetidiest and most orderly brain, with the greatest capacity forstoring facts, of any man living. The same great powers which I haveturned to the detection of crime he has used for this particularbusiness. The conclusions of every department are passed to him, andhe is the central exchange, the clearinghouse, which makes out thebalance. All other men are specialists, but his specialism isomniscience. We will suppose that a minister needs information as toa point which involves the Navy, India, Canada and the bimetallicquestion; he could get his separate advices from various departmentsupon each, but only Mycroft can focus them all, and say offhand howeach factor would affect the other. They began by using him as ashort-cut, a convenience; now he has made himself an essential. Inthat great brain of his everything is pigeon-holed and can be handedout in an instant. Again and again his word has decided the nationalpolicy. He lives in it. He thinks of nothing else save when, as anintellectual exercise, he unbends if I call upon him and ask him toadvise me on one of my little problems. But Jupiter is descendingto-day. What on earth can it mean? Who is Cadogan West, and what ishe to Mycroft?"
"I have it," I cried, and plunged among the litter of papers upon thesofa. "Yes, yes, here he is, sure enough! Cadogen West was the youngman who was found dead on the Underground on Tuesday morning."
Holmes sat up at attention, his pipe halfway to his lips.
"This must be serious, Watson. A death which has caused my brother toalter his habits can be no ordinary one. What in the world can hehave to do with it? The case was featureless as I remember it. Theyoung man had apparently fallen out of the train and killed himself.He had not been robbed, and there was no particular reason to suspectviolence. Is that not so?"
"There has been an inquest," said I, "and a good many fresh factshave come out. Looked at more closely, I should certainly say that itwas a curious case."
"Judging by its effect upon my brother, I should think it must be amost extraordinary one." He snuggled down in his armchair. "Now,Watson, let us have the facts."
"The man's name was Arthur Cadogan West. He was twenty-seven years ofage, unmarried, and a clerk at Woolwich Arsenal."
"Government employ. Behold the link with Brother Mycroft!"
"He left Woolwich suddenly on Monday night. Was last seen by hisfiancee, Miss Violet Westbury, whom he left abruptly in the fog about7.30 that evening. There was no quarrel between them and she can giveno motive for his action. The next thing heard of him was when hisdead body was discovered by a plate-layer named Mason, just outsideAldgate Station on the Underground system in London."
"When?"
"The body was found at six on Tuesday morning. It was lying wide ofthe metals upon the left hand of the track as one goes eastward, at apoint close to the station, where the line emerges from the tunnel inwhich it runs. The head was badly crushed--an injury which might wellhave been caused by a fall from the train. The body could only havecome on the line in that way. Had it been carried down from anyneighbouring street, it must have passed the station barriers, wherea collector is always standing. This point seems absolutely certain."
"Very good. The case is definite enough. The man, dead or alive,either fell or was precipitated from a train. So much is clear to me.Continue."
"The trains which traverse the lines of rail beside which the bodywas found are those which run from west to east, some being purelyMetropolitan, and some from Willesden and outlying junctions. It canbe stated for certain that this young man, when he met his death, wastravelling in this direction at some late hour of the night, but atwhat point he entered the train it is impossible to state."
"His ticket, of course, would show that."
"There was no ticket in his pockets."
"No ticket! Dear me, Watson, this is really very singular. Accordingto my experience it is not possible to reach the platform of aMetropolitan train without exhibiting one's ticket. Presumably, then,the young man had one. Was it taken from him in order to conceal thestation from which he came? It is possible. Or did he drop it in thecarriage? That is also possible. But the point is of curiousinterest. I understand that there was no sign of robbery?"
"Apparently not. There is a list here of his possessions. His pursecontained two pounds fifteen. He had also a check-book on theWoolwich branch of the Capital and Counties Bank. Through this hisidentity was established. There were also two dress-circle ticketsfor the Woolwich Theatre, dated for that very evening. Also a smallpacket of technical papers."
Holmes gave an exclamation of satisfaction.
"There we have it at last, Watson! British government--Woolwich.Arsenal--technical papers--Brother Mycroft, the chain is complete.But here he comes, if I am not mistaken, to speak for himself."
A moment later the tall and portly form of Mycroft Holmes was usheredinto the room. Heavily built and massive, there was a suggestion ofuncouth physical inertia in the figure, but above this unwieldy framethere was perched a head so masterful in its brow, so alert in itssteel-gray, deep-set eyes, so firm in its lips, and so subtle in itsplay of expression, that after the first glance one forgot the grossbody and remembered only the dominant mind.
At his heels came our old friend Lestrade, of Scotland Yard--thin andaustere. The gravity of both their faces foretold some weighty quest.The detective shook hands without a word. Mycroft Holmes struggledout of his overcoat and subsided into an armchair.
"A most annoying business, Sherlock," said he. "I extremely dislikealtering my habits, but the powers that be would take no denial. Inthe present state of Siam it is most awkward that I should be awayfrom the office. But it is a real crisis. I have never seen the PrimeMinister so upset. As to the Admiralty--it is buzzing like anoverturned bee-hive. Have you read up the case?"
"We have just done so. What were the technical papers?"
"Ah, there's the point! Fortunately, it has not come out. The presswould be furious if it did. The papers which this wretched youth hadin his pocket were the plans of the Bruce-Partington submarine."
Mycroft Holmes spoke with a solemnity which showed his sense of theimportance of the subject. His brother and I sat expectant.
"Surely you have heard of it? I thought everyone had heard of it."
"Only as a name."
"Its importance can hardly be exaggerated. It has been the mostjealously guarded of all government secrets. You may take it from methat naval warfare becomes impossible within the radius of aBruce-Partington's operation. Two years ago a very large sum wassmuggled through the Estimates and was expended in acquiring amonopoly of the invention. Every effort has been made to keep thesecret. The plans, which are exceedingly intricate, comprising somethirty separate patents, each essential to the working of the whole,are kept in an elaborate safe in a confidential office adjoining thearsenal, with burglar-proof doors and windows. Under no conceivablecircumstances were the plans to be taken from the office. If thechief constructor of the Navy desired to consult them, even he wasforced to go to the Woolwich office for the purpose. And yet here wefind them in the pocket of a dead junior clerk in the heart ofLondon. From an official point of view it's simply awful."
"But you have recovered them?"
"No, Sherlock, no! That's the pinch. We have not. Ten papers weretaken from Woolwich. There were seven in the pocket of Cadogan West.The three most essential are gone--stolen, vanished. You must dropeverything, Sherlock. Never mind your usual petty puzzles of thepolice-court. It's a vital international problem that you have tosolve. Why did Cadogan West take the papers, where are the missingones, how did he die, how came his body where it was found, how canthe evil be set right? Find an answer to all these questions, and youwill have done good service for your country."
"Why do you not solve it yourself, Mycroft? You can see as far as I."
"Possibly, Sherlock. But it is a question of getting details. Give meyour details, and from an armchair I will return you an excellentexpert opinion. But to run here and run there, to cross-questionrailway guards, and lie on my face with a lens to my eye--it is notmy mtier. No, you are the one man who can clear the matter up. Ifyou have a fancy to see your name in the next honours list--"
My friend smiled and shook his head.
"I play the game for the game's own sake," said he. "But the problemcertainly presents some points of interest, and I shall be verypleased to look into it. Some more facts, please."
"I have jotted down the more essential ones upon this sheet of paper,together with a few addresses which you will find of service. Theactual official guardian of the papers is the famous governmentexpert, Sir James Walter, whose decorations and sub-titles fill twolines of a book of reference. He has grown gray in the service, is agentleman, a favoured guest in the most exalted houses, and, aboveall, a man whose patriotism is beyond suspicion. He is one of two whohave a key of the safe. I may add that the papers were undoubtedly inthe office during working hours on Monday, and that Sir James leftfor London about three o'clock taking his key with him. He was at thehouse of Admiral Sinclair at Barclay Square during the whole of theevening when this incident occurred."
"Has the fact been verified?"
"Yes; his brother, Colonel Valentine Walter, has testified to hisdeparture from Woolwich, and Admiral Sinclair to his arrival inLondon; so Sir James is no longer a direct factor in the problem."
"Who was the other man with a key?"
"The senior clerk and draughtsman, Mr. Sidney Johnson. He is a man offorty, married, with five children. He is a silent, morose man, buthe has, on the whole, an excellent record in the public service. Heis unpopular with his colleagues, but a hard worker. According to hisown account, corroborated only by the word of his wife, he was athome the whole of Monday evening after office hours, and his key hasnever left the watch-chain upon which it hangs."
"Tell us about Cadogan West."
"He has been ten years in the service and has done good work. He hasthe reputation of being hot-headed and imperious, but a straight,honest man. We have nothing against him. He was next Sidney Johnsonin the office. His duties brought him into daily, personal contactwith the plans. No one else had the handling of them."
"Who locked up the plans that night?"
"Mr. Sidney Johnson, the senior clerk."
"Well, it is surely perfectly clear who took them away. They areactually found upon the person of this junior clerk, Cadogan West.That seems final, does it not?"
"It does, Sherlock, and yet it leaves so much unexplained. In thefirst place, why did he take them?"
"I presume they were of value?"
"He could have got several thousands for them very easily."
"Can you suggest any possible motive for taking the papers to Londonexcept to sell them?"
"No, I cannot."
"Then we must take that as our working hypothesis. Young West tookthe papers. Now this could only be done by having a false key--"
"Several false keys. He had to open the building and the room."
"He had, then, several false keys. He took the papers to London tosell the secret, intending, no doubt, to have the plans themselvesback in the safe next morning before they were missed. While inLondon on this treasonable mission he met his end."
"How?"
"We will suppose that he was travelling back to Woolwich when he waskilled and thrown out of the compartment."
"Aldgate, where the body was found, is considerably past the stationLondon Bridge, which would be his route to Woolwich."
"Many circumstances could be imagined under which he would passLondon Bridge. There was someone in the carriage, for example, withwhom he was having an absorbing interview. This interview led to aviolent scene in which he lost his life. Possibly he tried to leavethe carriage, fell out on the line, and so met his end. The otherclosed the door. There was a thick fog, and nothing could be seen."
"No better explanation can be given with our present knowledge; andyet consider, Sherlock, how much you leave untouched. We willsuppose, for argument's sake, that young Cadogan West had determinedto convey these papers to London. He would naturally have made anappointment with the foreign agent and kept his evening clear.Instead of that he took two tickets for the theatre, escorted hisfiancee halfway there, and then suddenly disappeared."
"A blind," said Lestrade, who had sat listening with some impatienceto the conversation.
"A very singular one. That is objection No. 1. Objection No. 2: Wewill suppose that he reaches London and sees the foreign agent. Hemust bring back the papers before morning or the loss will bediscovered. He took away ten. Only seven were in his pocket. What hadbecome of the other three? He certainly would not leave them of hisown free will. Then, again, where is the price of his treason? Oncewould have expected to find a large sum of money in his pocket."
"It seems to me perfectly clear," said Lestrade. "I have no doubt atall as to what occurred. He took the papers to sell them. He saw theagent. They could not agree as to price. He started home again, butthe agent went with him. In the train the agent murdered him, tookthe more essential papers, and threw his body from the carriage. Thatwould account for everything, would it not?"
"Why had he no ticket?"
"The ticket would have shown which station was nearest the agent'shouse. Therefore he took it from the murdered man's pocket."
"Good, Lestrade, very good," said Holmes. "Your theory holdstogether. But if this is true, then the case is at an end. On the onehand, the traitor is dead. On the other, the plans of theBruce-Partington submarine are presumably already on the Continent.What is there for us to do?"
"To act, Sherlock--to act!" cried Mycroft, springing to his feet."All my instincts are against this explanation. Use your powers! Goto the scene of the crime! See the people concerned! Leave no stoneunturned! In all your career you have never had so great a chance ofserving your country."
"Well, well!" said Holmes, shrugging his shoulders. "Come, Watson!And you, Lestrade, could you favour us with your company for an houror two? We will begin our investigation by a visit to AldgateStation. Good-bye, Mycroft. I shall let you have a report beforeevening, but I warn you in advance that you have little to expect."
An hour later Holmes, Lestrade and I stood upon the Undergroundrailroad at the point where it emerges from the tunnel immediatelybefore Aldgate Station. A courteous red-faced old gentlemanrepresented the railway company.
"This is where the young man's body lay," said he, indicating a spotabout three feet from the metals. "It could not have fallen fromabove, for these, as you see, are all blank walls. Therefore, itcould only have come from a train, and that train, so far as we cantrace it, must have passed about midnight on Monday."
"Have the carriages been examined for any sign of violence?"
"There are no such signs, and no ticket has been found."
"No record of a door being found open?"
"None."
"We have had some fresh evidence this morning," said Lestrade. "Apassenger who passed Aldgate in an ordinary Metropolitan train about11.40 on Monday night declares that he heard a heavy thud, as of abody striking the line, just before the train reached the station.There was dense fog, however, and nothing could be seen. He made noreport of it at the time. Why, whatever is the matter with Mr.Holmes?"
My friend was standing with an expression of strained intensity uponhis face, staring at the railway metals where they curved out of thetunnel. Aldgate is a junction, and there was a network of points. Onthese his eager, questioning eyes were fixed, and I saw on his keen,alert face that tightening of the lips, that quiver of the nostrils,and concentration of the heavy, tufted brows which I knew so well.
"Points," he muttered; "the points."
"What of it? What do you mean?"
"I suppose there are no great number of points on a system such asthis?"
"No; they are very few."
"And a curve, too. Points, and a curve. By Jove! if it were only so."
"What is it, Mr. Holmes? Have you a clue?"
"An idea--an indication, no more. But the case certainly grows ininterest. Unique, perfectly unique, and yet why not? I do not see anyindications of bleeding on the line."
"There were hardly any."
"But I understand that there was a considerable wound."
"The bone was crushed, but there was no great external injury."
"And yet one would have expected some bleeding. Would it be possiblefor me to inspect the train which contained the passenger who heardthe thud of a fall in the fog?"
"I fear not, Mr. Holmes. The train has been broken up before now, andthe carriages redistributed."
"I can assure you, Mr. Holmes," said Lestrade, "that every carriagehas been carefully examined. I saw to it myself."
It was one of my friend's most obvious weaknesses that he wasimpatient with less alert intelligences than his own.
"Very likely," said he, turning away. "As it happens, it was not thecarriages which I desired to examine. Watson, we have done all we canhere. We need not trouble you any further, Mr. Lestrade. I think ourinvestigations must now carry us to Woolwich."
At London Bridge, Holmes wrote a telegram to his brother, which hehanded to me before dispatching it. It ran thus:
See some light in the darkness, but it may possibly flicker out.Meanwhile, please send by messenger, to await return at Baker Street,a complete list of all foreign spies or international agents known tobe in England, with full address.Sherlock.
"That should be helpful, Watson," he remarked as we took our seats inthe Woolwich train.  "We certainly owe Brother Mycroft a debt forhaving introduced us to what promises to be a really very remarkablecase."
His eager face still wore that expression of intense and high-strungenergy, which showed me that some novel and suggestive circumstancehad opened up a stimulating line of thought. See the foxhound withhanging ears and drooping tail as it lolls about the kennels, andcompare it with the same hound as, with gleaming eyes and strainingmuscles, it runs upon a breast-high scent--such was the change inHolmes since the morning. He was a different man from the limp andlounging figure in the mouse-coloured dressing-gown who had prowledso restlessly only a few hours before round the fog-girt room.
"There is material here. There is scope," said he. "I am dull indeednot to have understood its possibilities."
"Even now they are dark to me."
"The end is dark to me also, but I have hold of one idea which maylead us far. The man met his death elsewhere, and his body was on theroof of a carriage."
"On the roof!"
"Remarkable, is it not? But consider the facts. Is it a coincidencethat it is found at the very point where the train pitches and swaysas it comes round on the points? Is not that the place where anobject upon the roof might be expected to fall off? The points wouldaffect no object inside the train. Either the body fell from theroof, or a very curious coincidence has occurred. But now considerthe question of the blood. Of course, there was no bleeding on theline if the body had bled elsewhere. Each fact is suggestive initself. Together they have a cumulative force."
"And the ticket, too!" I cried.
"Exactly.  We could not explain the absence of a ticket. This wouldexplain it. Everything fits together."
"But suppose it were so, we are still as far as ever from unravellingthe mystery of his death. Indeed, it becomes not simpler butstranger."
"Perhaps," said Holmes, thoughtfully, "perhaps." He relapsed into asilent reverie, which lasted until the slow train drew up at last inWoolwich Station. There he called a cab and drew Mycroft's paper fromhis pocket.
"We have quite a little round of afternoon calls to make," said he."I think that Sir James Walter claims our first attention."
The house of the famous official was a fine villa with green lawnsstretching down to the Thames. As we reached it the fog was lifting,and a thin, watery sunshine was breaking through. A butler answeredour ring.
"Sir James, sir!" said he with solemn face. "Sir James died thismorning."
"Good heavens!" cried Holmes in amazement. "How did he die?"
"Perhaps you would care to step in, sir, and see his brother, ColonelValentine?"
"Yes, we had best do so."
We were ushered into a dim-lit drawing-room, where an instant laterwe were joined by a very tall, handsome, light-beared man of fifty,the younger brother of the dead scientist. His wild eyes, stainedcheeks, and unkempt hair all spoke of the sudden blow which hadfallen upon the household. He was hardly articulate as he spoke ofit.
"It was this horrible scandal," said he. "My brother, Sir James, wasa man of very sensitive honour, and he could not survive such anaffair. It broke his heart. He was always so proud of the efficiencyof his department, and this was a crushing blow."
"We had hoped that he might have given us some indications whichwould have helped us to clear the matter up."
"I assure you that it was all a mystery to him as it is to you and toall of us. He had already put all his knowledge at the disposal ofthe police. Naturally he had no doubt that Cadogan West was guilty.But all the rest was inconceivable."
"You cannot throw any new light upon the affair?"
"I know nothing myself save what I have read or heard. I have nodesire to be discourteous, but you can understand, Mr. Holmes, thatwe are much disturbed at present, and I must ask you to hasten thisinterview to an end."
"This is indeed an unexpected development," said my friend when wehad regained the cab. "I wonder if the death was natural, or whetherthe poor old fellow killed himself! If the latter, may it be taken assome sign of self-reproach for duty neglected? We must leave thatquestion to the future. Now we shall turn to the Cadogan Wests."
A small but well-kept house in the outskirts of the town shelteredthe bereaved mother. The old lady was too dazed with grief to be ofany use to us, but at her side was a white-faced young lady, whointroduced herself as Miss Violet Westbury, the fiancee of the deadman, and the last to see him upon that fatal night.
"I cannot explain it, Mr. Holmes," she said. "I have not shut an eyesince the tragedy, thinking, thinking, thinking, night and day, whatthe true meaning of it can be. Arthur was the most single-minded,chivalrous, patriotic man upon earth. He would have cut his righthand off before he would sell a State secret confided to his keeping.It is absurd, impossible, preposterous to anyone who knew him."
"But the facts, Miss Westbury?"
"Yes, yes; I admit I cannot explain them."
"Was he in any want of money?"
"No; his needs were very simple and his salary ample. He had saved afew hundreds, and we were to marry at the New Year."
"No signs of any mental excitement? Come, Miss Westbury, beabsolutely frank with us."
The quick eye of my companion had noted some change in her manner.She coloured and hesitated.
"Yes," she said at last, "I had a feeling that there was something onhis mind."
"For long?"
"Only for the last week or so. He was thoughtful and worried. Once Ipressed him about it. He admitted that there was something, and thatit was concerned with his official life. 'It is too serious for me tospeak about, even to you,' said he. I could get nothing more."
Holmes looked grave.
"Go on, Miss Westbury. Even if it seems to tell against him, go on.We cannot say what it may lead to."
"Indeed, I have nothing more to tell. Once or twice it seemed to methat he was on the point of telling me something. He spoke oneevening of the importance of the secret, and I have some recollectionthat he said that no doubt foreign spies would pay a great deal tohave it."
My friend's face grew graver still.
"Anything else?"
"He said that we were slack about such matters--that it would be easyfor a traitor to get the plans."
"Was it only recently that he made such remarks?"
"Yes, quite recently."
"Now tell us of that last evening."
"We were to go to the theatre. The fog was so thick that a cab wasuseless. We walked, and our way took us close to the office. Suddenlyhe darted away into the fog."
"Without a word?"
"He gave an exclamation; that was all. I waited but he neverreturned. Then I walked home. Next morning, after the office opened,they came to inquire. About twelve o'clock we heard the terriblenews. Oh, Mr. Holmes, if you could only, only save his honour! It wasso much to him."
Holmes shook his head sadly.
"Come, Watson," said he, "our ways lie elsewhere. Our next stationmust be the office from which the papers were taken.
"It was black enough before against this young man, but our inquiriesmake it blacker," he remarked as the cab lumbered off. "His comingmarriage gives a motive for the crime. He naturally wanted money. Theidea was in his head, since he spoke about it. He nearly made thegirl an accomplice in the treason by telling her his plans. It is allvery bad."
"But surely, Holmes, character goes for something? Then, again, whyshould he leave the girl in the street and dart away to commit afelony?"
"Exactly! There are certainly objections. But it is a formidable casewhich they have to meet."
Mr. Sidney Johnson, the senior clerk, met us at the office andreceived us with that respect which my companion's card alwayscommanded. He was a thin, gruff, bespectacled man of middle age, hischeeks haggard, and his hands twitching from the nervous strain towhich he had been subjected.
"It is bad, Mr. Holmes, very bad! Have you heard of the death of thechief?"
"We have just come from his house."
"The place is disorganized. The chief dead, Cadogan West dead, ourpapers stolen. And yet, when we closed our door on Monday evening, wewere as efficient an office as any in the government service. GoodGod, it's dreadful to think of! That West, of all men, should havedone such a thing!"
"You are sure of his guilt, then?"
"I can see no other way out of it. And yet I would have trusted himas I trust myself."
"At what hour was the office closed on Monday?"
"At five."
"Did you close it?"
"I am always the last man out."
"Where were the plans?"
"In that safe. I put them there myself."
"Is there no watchman to the building?"
"There is, but he has other departments to look after as well. He isan old soldier and a most trustworthy man. He saw nothing thatevening. Of course the fog was very thick."
"Suppose that Cadogan West wished to make his way into the buildingafter hours; he would need three keys, would he not, before the couldreach the papers?"
"Yes, he would. The key of the outer door, the key of the office, andthe key of the safe."
"Only Sir James Walter and you had those keys?"
"I had no keys of the doors--only of the safe."
"Was Sir James a man who was orderly in his habits?"
"Yes, I think he was. I know that so far as those three keys areconcerned he kept them on the same ring. I have often seen themthere."
"And that ring went with him to London?"
"He said so."
"And your key never left your possession?"
"Never."
"Then West, if he is the culprit, must have had a duplicate. And yetnone was found upon his body. One other point: if a clerk in thisoffice desired to sell the plans, would it not be simply to copy theplans for himself than to take the originals, as was actually done?"
"It would take considerable technical knowledge to copy the plans inan effective way."
"But I suppose either Sir James, or you, or West has that technicalknowledge?"
"No doubt we had, but I beg you won't try to drag me into the matter,Mr. Holmes. What is the use of our speculating in this way when theoriginal plans were actually found on West?"
"Well, it is certainly singular that he should run the risk of takingoriginals if he could safely have taken copies, which would haveequally served his turn."
"Singular, no doubt--and yet he did so."
"Every inquiry in this case reveals something inexplicable. Now thereare three papers still missing. They are, as I understand, the vitalones."
"Yes, that is so."
"Do you mean to say that anyone holding these three papers, andwithout the seven others, could construct a Bruce-Partingtonsubmarine?"
"I reported to that effect to the Admiralty. But to-day I have beenover the drawings again, and I am not so sure of it. The doublevalves with the automatic self-adjusting slots are drawn in one ofthe papers which have been returned. Until the foreigners hadinvented that for themselves they could not make the boat. Of coursethey might soon get over the difficulty."
"But the three missing drawings are the most important?"
"Undoubtedly."
"I think, with your permission, I will now take a stroll round thepremises. I do not recall any other question which I desired to ask."
He examined the lock of the safe, the door of the room, and finallythe iron shutters of the window. It was only when we were on the lawnoutside that his interest was strongly excited. There was a laurelbush outside the window, and several of the branches bore signs ofhaving been twisted or snapped. He examined them carefully with hislens, and then some dim and vague marks upon the earth beneath.Finally he asked the chief clerk to close the iron shutters, and hepointed out to me that they hardly met in the centre, and that itwould be possible for anyone outside to see what was going on withinthe room.
"The indications are ruined by three days' delay. They may meansomething or nothing. Well, Watson, I do not think that Woolwich canhelp us further. It is a small crop which we have gathered. Let ussee if we can do better in London."
Yet we added one more sheaf to our harvest before we left WoolwichStation. The clerk in the ticket office was able to say withconfidence that he saw Cadogan West--whom he knew well by sight--uponthe Monday night, and that he went to London by the 8.15 to LondonBridge. He was alone and took a single third-class ticket. The clerkwas struck at the time by his excited and nervous manner. So shakywas he that he could hardly pick up his change, and the clerk hadhelped him with it. A reference to the timetable showed that the 8.15was the first train which it was possible for West to take after hehad left the lady about 7.30.
"Let us reconstruct, Watson," said Holmes after half an hour ofsilence. "I am not aware that in all our joint researches we haveever had a case which was more difficult to get at. Every freshadvance which we make only reveals a fresh ridge beyond. And yet wehave surely made some appreciable progress.
"The effect of our inquiries at Woolwich has in the main been againstyoung Cadogan West; but the indications at the window would lendthemselves to a more favourable hypothesis. Let us suppose, forexample, that he had been approached by some foreign agent. It mighthave been done under such pledges as would have prevented him fromspeaking of it, and yet would have affected his thoughts in thedirection indicated by his remarks to his fiancee. Very good. We willnow suppose that as he went to the theatre with the young lady hesuddenly, in the fog, caught a glimpse of this same agent going inthe direction of the office. He was an impetuous man, quick in hisdecisions. Everything gave way to his duty. He followed the man,reached the window, saw the abstraction of the documents, and pursuedthe thief. In this way we get over the objection that no one wouldtake originals when he could make copies. This outsider had to takeoriginals. So far it holds together."
"What is the next step?"
"Then we come into difficulties. One would imagine that under suchcircumstances the first act of young Cadogan West would be to seizethe villain and raise the alarm. Why did he not do so? Could it havebeen an official superior who took the papers? That would explainWest's conduct. Or could the chief have given West the slip in thefog, and West started at once to London to head him off from his ownrooms, presuming that he knew where the rooms were? The call musthave been very pressing, since he left his girl standing in the fogand made no effort to communicate with her. Our scent runs cold here,and there is a vast gap between either hypothesis and the laying ofWest's body, with seven papers in his pocket, on the roof of aMetropolitan train. My instinct now is to work form the other end. IfMycroft has given us the list of addresses we may be able to pick ourman and follow two tracks instead of one."
Surely enough, a note awaited us at Baker Street. A governmentmessenger had brought it post-haste. Holmes glanced at it and threwit over to me.
There are numerous small fry, but few who would handle so big anaffair. The only men worth considering are Adolph Mayer, of 13 GreatGeorge Street, Westminster; Louis La Rothiere, of Campden Mansions,Notting Hill; and Hugo Oberstein, 13 Caulfield Gardens, Kensington.The latter was known to be in town on Monday and is now reported ashaving left. Glad to hear you have seen some light. The Cabinetawaits your final report with the utmost anxiety. Urgentrepresentations have arrived from the very highest quarter. The wholeforce of the State is at your back if you should need it.Mycroft.
"I'm afraid," said Holmes, smiling, "that all the queen's horses andall the queen's men cannot avail in this matter." He had spread outhis big map of London and leaned eagerly over it. "Well, well," saidhe presently with an exclamation of satisfaction, "things are turninga little in our direction at last. Why, Watson, I do honestly believethat we are going to pull it off, after all." He slapped me on theshoulder with a sudden burst of hilarity. "I am going out now. It isonly a reconnaissance. I will do nothing serious without my trustedcomrade and biographer at my elbow. Do you stay here, and the oddsare that you will see me again in an hour or two. If time hangs heavyget foolscap and a pen, and begin your narrative of how we saved theState."
I felt some reflection of his elation in my own mind, for I knew wellthat he would not depart so far from his usual austerity of demeanourunless there was good cause for exultation. All the long Novemberevening I waited, filled with impatience for his return. At last,shortly after nine o'clock, there arrived a messenger with a note:
Am dining at Goldini's Restaurant, Gloucester Road, Kensington.Please come at once and join me there. Bring with you a jemmy, a darklantern, a chisel, and a revolver.S.H.
It was a nice equipment for a respectable citizen to carry throughthe dim, fog-draped streets. I stowed them all discreetly away in myovercoat and drove straight to the address given. There sat my friendat a little round table near the door of the garish Italianrestaurant.
"Have you had something to eat? Then join me in a coffee and curacao.Try one of the proprietor's cigars. They are less poisonous than onewould expect. Have you the tools?"
"They are here, in my overcoat."
"Excellent. Let me give you a short sketch of what I have done, withsome indication of what we are about to do. Now it must be evident toyou, Watson, that this young man's body was placed on the roof of thetrain. That was clear from the instant that I determined the factthat it was from the roof, and not from a carriage, that he hadfallen."
"Could it not have been dropped from a bridge?"
"I should say it was impossible. If you examine the roofs you willfind that they are slightly rounded, and there is no railing roundthem. Therefore, we can say for certain that young Cadogan West wasplaced on it."
"How could he be placed there?"
"That was the question which we had to answer. There is only onepossible way. You are aware that the Underground runs clear oftunnels at some points in the West End. I had a vague memory that asI have travelled by it I have occasionally seen windows just above myhead. Now, suppose that a train halted under such a window, wouldthere be any difficulty in laying a body upon the roof?"
"It seems most improbable."
"We must fall back upon the old axiom that when all othercontingencies fail, whatever remains, however improbable, must be thetruth. Here all other contingencies have failed. When I found thatthe leading international agent, who had just left London, lived in arow of houses which abutted upon the Underground, I was so pleasedthat you were a little astonished at my sudden frivolity."
"Oh, that was it, was it?"
"Yes, that was it. Mr. Hugo Oberstein, of 13 Caulfield Gardens, hadbecome my objective. I began my operations at Gloucester RoadStation, where a very helpful official walked with me along the trackand allowed me to satisfy myself not only that the back-stair windowsof Caulfield Gardens open on the line but the even more essentialfact that, owing to the intersection of one of the larger railways,the Underground trains are frequently held motionless for someminutes at that very spot."
"Splendid, Holmes! You have got it!"
"So far--so far, Watson. We advance, but the goal is afar. Well,having seen the back of Caulfield Gardens, I visited the front andsatisfied myself that the bird was indeed flown. It is a considerablehouse, unfurnished, so far as I could judge, in the upper rooms.Oberstein lived there with a single valet, who was probably aconfederate entirely in his confidence. We must bear in mind thatOberstein has gone to the Continent to dispose of his booty, but notwith any idea of flight; for he had no reason to fear a warrant, andthe idea of an amateur domiciliary visit would certainly never occurto him. Yet that is precisely what we are about to make."
"Could we not get a warrant and legalize it?"
"Hardly on the evidence."
"What can we hope to do?"
"We cannot tell what correspondence may be there."
"I don't like it, Holmes."
"My dear fellow, you shall keep watch in the street. I'll do thecriminal part. It's not a time to stick at trifles. Think ofMycroft's note, of the Admiralty, the Cabinet, the exalted person whowaits for news. We are bound to go."
My answer was to rise from the table.
"You are right, Holmes. We are bound to go."
He sprang up and shook me by the hand.
"I knew you would not shrink at the last," said he, and for a momentI saw something in his eyes which was nearer to tenderness than I hadever seen. The next instant he was his masterful, practical self oncemore.
"It is nearly half a mile, but there is no hurry. Let us walk," saidhe. "Don't drop the instruments, I beg. Your arrest as a suspiciouscharacter would be a most unfortunate complication."
Caulfield Gardens was one of those lines of flat-faced pillared, andporticoed houses which are so prominent a product of the middleVictorian epoch in the West End of London. Next door there appearedto be a children's party, for the merry buzz of young voices and theclatter of a piano resounded through the night. The fog still hungabout and screened us with its friendly shade. Holmes had lit hislantern and flashed it upon the massive door.
"This is a serious proposition," said he. "It is certainly bolted aswell as locked. We would do better in the area. There is an excellentarchway down yonder in case a too zealous policeman should intrude.Give me a hand, Watson, and I'll do the same for you."
A minute later we were both in the area. Hardly had we reached thedark shadows before the step of the policeman was heard in the fogabove. As its soft rhythm died away, Holmes set to work upon thelower door. I saw him stoop and strain until with a sharp crash itflew open. We sprang through into the dark passage, closing the areadoor behind us. Holmes let the way up the curving, uncarpeted stair.His little fan of yellow light shone upon a low window.
"Here we are, Watson--this must be the one." He threw it open, and ashe did so there was a low, harsh murmur, growing steadily into a loudroar as a train dashed past us in the darkness. Holmes swept hislight along the window-sill. It was thickly coated with soot from thepassing engines, but the black surface was blurred and rubbed inplaces.
"You can see where they rested the body. Halloa, Watson! what isthis? There can be no doubt that it is a blood mark." He was pointingto faint discolourations along the woodwork of the window. "Here itis on the stone of the stair also. The demonstration is complete. Letus stay here until a train stops."
We had not long to wait. The very next train roared from the tunnelas before, but slowed in the open, and then, with a creaking ofbrakes, pulled up immediately beneath us. It was not four feet fromthe window-ledge to the roof of the carriages. Holmes softly closedthe window.
"So far we are justified," said he. "What do you think of it,Watson?"
"A masterpiece. You have never risen to a greater height."
"I cannot agree with you there. From the moment that I conceived theidea of the body being upon the roof, which surely was not a veryabstruse one, all the rest was inevitable. If it were not for thegrave interests involved the affair up to this point would beinsignificant. Our difficulties are still before us. But perhaps wemay find something here which may help us."
We had ascended the kitchen stair and entered the suite of rooms uponthe first floor. One was a dining-room, severely furnished andcontaining nothing of interest. A second was a bedroom, which alsodrew blank. The remaining room appeared more promising, and mycompanion settled down to a systematic examination. It was litteredwith books and papers, and was evidently used as a study. Swiftly andmethodically Holmes turned over the contents of drawer after drawerand cupboard after cupboard, but no gleam of success came to brightenhis austere face. At the end of an hour he was no further than whenhe started.
"The cunning dog has covered his tracks," said he. "He has leftnothing to incriminate him. His dangerous correspondence has beendestroyed or removed. This is our last chance."
It was a small tin cash-box which stood upon the writing-desk. Holmespried it open with his chisel. Several rolls of paper were within,covered with figures and calculations, without any note to show towhat they referred. The recurring words, "water pressure" and"pressure to the square inch" suggested some possible relation to asubmarine. Holmes tossed them all impatiently aside. There onlyremained an envelope with some small newspaper slips inside it. Heshook them out on the table, and at once I saw by his eager face thathis hopes had been raised.
"What's this, Watson? Eh? What's this? Record of a series of messagesin the advertisements of a paper. Daily Telegraph agony column by theprint and paper. Right-hand top corner of a page. No dates--butmessages arrange themselves. This must be the first:
"Hoped to hear sooner. Terms agreed to. Write fully to address givenon card.Pierrot.
"Next comes:
"Too complex for description. Must have full report, Stuff awaits youwhen goods delivered.Pierrot.
"Then comes:
"Matter presses. Must withdraw offer unless contract completed. Makeappointment by letter. Will confirm by advertisement.Pierrot.
"Finally:
"Monday night after nine. Two taps. Only ourselves. Do not be sosuspicious. Payment in hard cash when goods delivered.Pierrot.
"A fairly complete record, Watson! If we could only get at the man atthe other end!" He sat lost in thought, tapping his fingers on thetable. Finally he sprang to his feet.
"Well, perhaps it won't be so difficult, after all. There is nothingmore to be done here, Watson. I think we might drive round to theoffices of the Daily Telegraph, and so bring a good day's work to aconclusion."
Mycroft Holmes and Lestrade had come round by appointment afterbreakfast next day and Sherlock Holmes had recounted to them ourproceedings of the day before. The professional shook his head overour confessed burglary.
"We can't do these things in the force, Mr. Holmes," said he. "Nowonder you get results that are beyond us. But some of these daysyou'll go too far, and you'll find yourself and your friend introuble."
"For England, home and beauty--eh, Watson? Martyrs on the altar ofour country. But what do you think of it, Mycroft?"
"Excellent, Sherlock! Admirable! But what use will you make of it?"
Holmes picked up the Daily Telegraph which lay upon the table.
"Have you seen Pierrot's advertisement to-day?"
"What? Another one?"
"Yes, here it is:
"To-night. Same hour. Same place. Two taps. Most vitally important.Your own safety at stake.Pierrot.
"By George!" cried Lestrade. "If he answers that we've got him!"
"That was my idea when I put it in. I think if you could both make itconvenient to come with us about eight o'clock to Caulfield Gardenswe might possibly get a little nearer to a solution."
One of the most remarkable characteristics of Sherlock Holmes was hispower of throwing his brain out of action and switching all histhoughts on to lighter things whenever he had convinced himself thathe could no longer work to advantage. I remember that during thewhole of that memorable day he lost himself in a monograph which hehad undertaken upon the Polyphonic Motets of Lassus. For my own partI had none of this power of detachment, and the day, in consequence,appeared to be interminable. The great national importance of theissue, the suspense in high quarters, the direct nature of theexperiment which we were trying--all combined to work upon my nerve.It was a relief to me when at last, after a light dinner, we set outupon our expedition. Lestrade and Mycroft met us by appointment atthe outside of Gloucester Road Station. The area door of Oberstein'shouse had been left open the night before, and it was necessary forme, as Mycroft Holmes absolutely and indignantly declined to climbthe railings, to pass in and open the hall door. By nine o'clock wewere all seated in the study, waiting patently for our man.
An hour passed and yet another. When eleven struck, the measured beatof the great church clock seemed to sound the dirge of our hopes.Lestrade and Mycroft were fidgeting in their seats and looking twicea minute at their watches. Holmes sat silent and composed, hiseyelids half shut, but every sense on the alert. He raised his headwith a sudden jerk.
"He is coming," said he.
There had been a furtive step past the door. Now it returned. Weheard a shuffling sound outside, and then two sharp taps with theknocker. Holmes rose, motioning us to remain seated. The gas in thehall was a mere point of light. He opened the outer door, and then asa dark figure slipped past him he closed and fastened it. "This way!"we heard him say, and a moment later our man stood before us. Holmeshad followed him closely, and as the man turned with a cry ofsurprise and alarm he caught him by the collar and threw him backinto the room. Before our prisoner had recovered his balance the doorwas shut and Holmes standing with his back against it. The man glaredround him, staggered, and fell senseless upon the floor. With theshock, his broad-brimmed hat flew from his head, his cravat slippedsown from his lips, and there were the long light beard and the soft,handsome delicate features of Colonel Valentine Walter.
Holmes gave a whistle of surprise.
"You can write me down an ass this time, Watson," said he. "This wasnot the bird that I was looking for."
"Who is he?" asked Mycroft eagerly.
"The younger brother of the late Sir James Walter, the head of theSubmarine Department. Yes, yes; I see the fall of the cards. He iscoming to. I think that you had best leave his examination to me."
We had carried the prostrate body to the sofa. Now our prisoner satup, looked round him with a horror-stricken face, and passed his handover his forehead, like one who cannot believe his own senses.
"What is this?" he asked. "I came here to visit Mr. Oberstein."
"Everything is known, Colonel Walter," said Holmes. "How an Englishgentleman could behave in such a manner is beyond my comprehension.But your whole correspondence and relations with Oberstein are withinour knowledge. So also are the circumstances connected with the deathof young Cadogan West. Let me advise you to gain at least the smallcredit for repentance and confession, since there are still somedetails which we can only learn from your lips."
The man groaned and sank his face in his hands. We waited, but he wassilent.
"I can assure you," said Holmes, "that every essential is alreadyknown. We know that you were pressed for money; that you took animpress of the keys which your brother held; and that you enteredinto a correspondence with Oberstein, who answered your lettersthrough the advertisement columns of the Daily Telegraph. We areaware that you went down to the office in the fog on Monday night,but that you were seen and followed by young Cadogan West, who hadprobably some previous reason to suspect you. He saw your theft, butcould not give the alarm, as it was just possible that you weretaking the papers to your brother in London. Leaving all his privateconcerns, like the good citizen that he was, he followed you closelyin the fog and kept at your heels until you reached this very house.There he intervened, and then it was, Colonel Walter, that to treasonyou added the more terrible crime of murder."
"I did not! I did not! Before God I swear that I did not!" cried ourwretched prisoner.
"Tell us, then, how Cadogan West met his end before you laid him uponthe roof of a railway carriage."
"I will. I swear to you that I will. I did the rest. I confess it. Itwas just as you say. A Stock Exchange debt had to be paid. I neededthe money badly. Oberstein offered me five thousand. It was to savemyself from ruin. But as to murder, I am as innocent as you."
"What happened, then?"
"He had his suspicions before, and he followed me as you describe. Inever knew it until I was at the very door. It was thick fog, and onecould not see three yards. I had given two taps and Oberstein hadcome to the door. The young man rushed up and demanded to know whatwe were about to do with the papers. Oberstein had a shortlife-preserver. He always carried it with him. As West forced his wayafter us into the house Oberstein struck him on the head. The blowwas a fatal one. He was dead within five minutes. There he lay in thehall, and we were at our wit's end what to do. Then Oberstein hadthis idea about the trains which halted under his back window. Butfirst he examined the papers which I had brought. He said that threeof them were essential, and that he must keep them. 'You cannot keepthem,' said I. 'There will be a dreadful row at Woolwich if they arenot returned.' 'I must keep them,' said he, 'for they are sotechnical that it is impossible in the time to make copies.' 'Thenthey must all go back together to-night,' said I. He thought for alittle, and then he cried out that he had it. 'Three I will keep,'said he. 'The others we will stuff into the pocket of this young man.When he is found the whole business will assuredly be put to hisaccount.' I could see no other way out of it, so we did as hesuggested. We waited half an hour at the window before a trainstopped. It was so thick that nothing could be seen, and we had nodifficulty in lowering West's body on to the train. That was the endof the matter so far as I was concerned."
"And your brother?"
"He said nothing, but he had caught me once with his keys, and Ithink that he suspected. I read in his eyes that he suspected. As youknow, he never held up his head again."
There was silence in the room. It was broken by Mycroft Holmes.
"Can you not make reparation? It would ease your conscience, andpossibly your punishment."
"What reparation can I make?"
"Where is Oberstein with the papers?"
"I do not know."
"Did he give you no address?"
"He said that letters to the Htel du Louvre, Paris, would eventuallyreach him."
"Then reparation is still within your power," said Sherlock Holmes.
"I will do anything I can. I owe this fellow no particular good-will.He has been my ruin and my downfall."
"Here are paper and pen. Sit at this desk and write to my dictation.Direct the envelope to the address given. That is right. Now theletter:
"Dear Sir:"With regard to our transaction, you will no doubt have observed bynow that one essential detail is missing. I have a tracing which willmake it complete. This has involved me in extra trouble, however, andI must ask you for a further advance of five hundred pounds. I willnot trust it to the post, nor will I take anything but gold or notes.I would come to you abroad, but it would excite remark if I left thecountry at present. Therefore I shall expect to meet you in thesmoking-room of the Charing Cross Hotel at noon on Saturday. Rememberthat only English notes, or gold, will be taken.
"That will do very well. I shall be very much surprised if it doesnot fetch our man."
And it did! It is a matter of history--that secret history of anation which is often so much more intimate and interesting than itspublic chronicles--that Oberstein, eager to complete the coup of hislifetime, came to the lure and was safely engulfed for fifteen yearsin a British prison. In his trunk were found the invaluableBruce-Partington plans, which he had put up for auction in all thenaval centres of Europe.
Colonel Walter died in prison towards the end of the second year ofhis sentence. As to Holmes, he returned refreshed to his monographupon the Polyphonic Motets of Lassus, which has since been printedfor private circulation, and is said by experts to be the last wordupon the subject. Some weeks afterwards I learned incidentally thatmy friend spent a day at Windsor, whence be returned with aremarkably fine emerald tie-pin. When I asked him if he had boughtit, he answered that it was a present from a certain gracious lady inwhose interests he had once been fortunate enough to carry out asmall commission. He said no more; but I fancy that I could guess atthat lady's august name, and I have little doubt that the emerald pinwill forever recall to my friend's memory the adventure of theBruce-Partington plans.





                 THE ADVENTURE OF THE DYING DETECTIVE
Mrs. Hudson, the landlady of Sherlock Holmes, was a long-sufferingwoman. Not only was her first-floor flat invaded at all hours bythrongs of singular and often undesirable characters but herremarkable lodger showed an eccentricity and irregularity in his lifewhich must have sorely tried her patience. His incredible untidiness,his addiction to music at strange hours, his occasional revolverpractice within doors, his weird and often malodorous scientificexperiments, and the atmosphere of violence and danger which hungaround him made him the very worst tenant in London. On the otherhand, his payments were princely. I have no doubt that the housemight have been purchased at the price which Holmes paid for hisrooms during the years that I was with him.
The landlady stood in the deepest awe of him and never dared tointerfere with him, however outrageous his proceedings might seem.She was fond of him, too, for he had a remarkable gentleness andcourtesy in his dealings with women. He disliked and distrusted thesex, but he was always a chivalrous opponent. Knowing how genuine washer regard for him, I listened earnestly to her story when she cameto my rooms in the second year of my married life and told me of thesad condition to which my poor friend was reduced.
"He's dying, Dr. Watson," said she. "For three days he has beensinking, and I doubt if he will last the day. He would not let me geta doctor. This morning when I saw his bones sticking out of his faceand his great bright eyes looking at me I could stand no more of it.'With your leave or without it, Mr. Holmes, I am going for a doctorthis very hour,' said I. 'Let it be Watson, then,' said he. Iwouldn't waste an hour in coming to him, sir, or you may not see himalive."
I was horrified for I had heard nothing of his illness. I need notsay that I rushed for my coat and my hat. As we drove back I askedfor the details.
"There is little I can tell you, sir. He has been working at a casedown at Rotherhithe, in an alley near the river, and he has broughtthis illness back with him. He took to his bed on Wednesday afternoonand has never moved since. For these three days neither food nordrink has passed his lips."
"Good God! Why did you not call in a doctor?"
"He wouldn't have it, sir. You know how masterful he is. I didn'tdare to disobey him. But he's not long for this world, as you'll seefor yourself the moment that you set eyes on him."
He was indeed a deplorable spectacle. In the dim light of a foggyNovember day the sick room was a gloomy spot, but it was that gaunt,wasted face staring at me from the bed which sent a chill to myheart. His eyes had the brightness of fever, there was a hectic flushupon either cheek, and dark crusts clung to his lips; the thin handsupon the coverlet twitched incessantly, his voice was croaking andspasmodic. He lay listlessly as I entered the room, but the sight ofme brought a gleam of recognition to his eyes.
"Well, Watson, we seem to have fallen upon evil days," said he in afeeble voice, but with something of his old carelessness of manner.
"My dear fellow!" I cried, approaching him.
"Stand back! Stand right back!" said he with the sharp imperiousnesswhich I had associated only with moments of crisis. "If you approachme, Watson, I shall order you out of the house."
"But why?"
"Because it is my desire. Is that not enough?"
Yes, Mrs. Hudson was right. He was more masterful than ever. It waspitiful, however, to see his exhaustion.
"I only wished to help," I explained.
"Exactly! You will help best by doing what you are told."
"Certainly, Holmes."
He relaxed the austerity of his manner.
"You are not angry?" he asked, gasping for breath.
Poor devil, how could I be angry when I saw him lying in such aplight before me?
"It's for your own sake, Watson," he croaked.
"For my sake?"
"I know what is the matter with me. It is a coolie disease fromSumatra--a thing that the Dutch know more about than we, though theyhave made little of it up to date. One thing only is certain. It isinfallibly deadly, and it is horribly contagious."
He spoke now with a feverish energy, the long hands twitching andjerking as he motioned me away.
"Contagious by touch, Watson--that's it, by touch. Keep your distanceand all is well."
"Good heavens, Holmes! Do you suppose that such a considerationweighs with me of an instant? It would not affect me in the case of astranger. Do you imagine it would prevent me from doing my duty to soold a friend?"
Again I advanced, but he repulsed me with a look of furious anger.
"If you will stand there I will talk. If you do not you must leavethe room."
I have so deep a respect for the extraordinary qualities of Holmesthat I have always deferred to his wishes, even when I leastunderstood them. But now all my professional instincts were aroused.Let him be my master elsewhere, I at least was his in a sick room.
"Holmes," said I, "you are not yourself. A sick man is but a child,and so I will treat you. Whether you like it or not, I will examineyour symptoms and treat you for them."
He looked at me with venomous eyes.
"If I am to have a doctor whether I will or not, let me at least havesomeone in whom I have confidence," said he.
"Then you have none in me?"
"In your friendship, certainly. But facts are facts, Watson, and,after all, you are only a general practitioner with very limitedexperience and mediocre qualifications. It is painful to have to saythese things, but you leave me no choice."
I was bitterly hurt.
"Such a remark is unworthy of you, Holmes. It shows me very clearlythe state of your own nerves. But if you have no confidence in me Iwould not intrude my services. Let me bring Sir Jasper Meek orPenrose Fisher, or any of the best men in London. But someone youmust have, and that is final. If you think that I am going to standhere and see you die without either helping you myself or bringinganyone else to help you, then you have mistaken your man."
"You mean well, Watson," said the sick man with something between asob and a groan. "Shall I demonstrate your own ignorance? What do youknow, pray, of Tapanuli fever? What do you know of the black Formosacorruption?"
"I have never heard of either."
"There are many problems of disease, many strange pathologicalpossibilities, in the East, Watson." He paused after each sentence tocollect his failing strength. "I have learned so much during somerecent researches which have a medico-criminal aspect. It was in thecourse of them that I contracted this complaint. You can do nothing."
"Possibly not. But I happen to know that Dr. Ainstree, the greatestliving authority upon tropical disease, is now in London. Allremonstrance is useless, Holmes, I am going this instant to fetchhim." I turned resolutely to the door.
Never have I had such a shock! In an instant, with a tiger-spring,the dying man had intercepted me. I heard the sharp snap of a twistedkey. The next moment he had staggered back to his bed, exhausted andpanting after his one tremendous outflame of energy.
"You won't take the key from be by force, Watson, I've got you, myfriend. Here you are, and here you will stay until I will otherwise.But I'll humour you." (All this in little gasps, with terriblestruggles for breath between.) "You've only my own good at heart. Ofcourse I know that very well. You shall have your way, but give metime to get my strength. Not now, Watson, not now. It's four o'clock.At six you can go."
"This is insanity, Holmes."
"Only two hours, Watson. I promise you will go at six. Are youcontent to wait?"
"I seem to have no choice."
"None in the world, Watson. Thank you, I need no help in arrangingthe clothes. You will please keep your distance. Now, Watson, thereis one other condition that I would make. You will seek help, notfrom the man you mention, but from the one that I choose."
"By all means."
"The first three sensible words that you have uttered since youentered this room, Watson. You will find some books over there. I amsomewhat exhausted; I wonder how a battery feels when it pourselectricity into a non-conductor? At six, Watson, we resume ourconversation."
But it was destined to be resumed long before that hour, and incircumstances which gave me a shock hardly second to that caused byhis spring to the door. I had stood for some minutes looking at thesilent figure in the bed. His face was almost covered by the clothesand he appeared to be asleep. Then, unable to settle down to reading,I walked slowly round the room, examining the pictures of celebratedcriminals with which every wall was adorned. Finally, in my aimlessperambulation, I came to the mantelpiece. A litter of pipes,tobacco-pouches, syringes, penknives, revolver-cartridges, and otherdebris was scattered over it. In the midst of these was a small blackand white ivory box with a sliding lid. It was a neat little thing,and I had stretched out my hand to examine it more closely when--
It was a dreadful cry that he gave--a yell which might have beenheard down the street. My skin went cold and my hair bristled at thathorrible scream. As I turned I caught a glimpse of a convulsed faceand frantic eyes. I stood paralyzed, with the little box in my hand.
"Put it down! Down, this instant, Watson--this instant, I say!" Hishead sank back upon the pillow and he gave a deep sigh of relief as Ireplaced the box upon the mantelpiece. "I hate to have my thingstouched, Watson. You know that I hate it. You fidget me beyondendurance. You, a doctor--you are enough to drive a patient into anasylum. Sit down, man, and let me have my rest!"
The incident left a most unpleasant impression upon my mind. Theviolent and causeless excitement, followed by this brutality ofspeech, so far removed from his usual suavity, showed me how deep wasthe disorganization of his mind. Of all ruins, that of a noble mindis the most deplorable. I sat in silent dejection until thestipulated time had passed. He seemed to have been watching the clockas well as I, for it was hardly six before he began to talk with thesame feverish animation as before.
"Now, Watson," said he. "Have you any change in your pocket?"
"Yes."
"Any silver?"
"A good deal."
"How many half-crowns?"
"I have five."
"Ah, too few! Too few! How very unfortunate, Watson! However, such asthey are you can put them in your watchpocket. And all the rest ofyour money in your left trouser pocket. Thank you. It will balanceyou so much better like that."
This was raving insanity. He shuddered, and again made a soundbetween a cough and a sob.
"You will now light the gas, Watson, but you will be very carefulthat not for one instant shall it be more than half on. I implore youto be careful, Watson. Thank you, that is excellent. No, you need notdraw the blind. Now you will have the kindness to place some lettersand papers upon this table within my reach. Thank you. Now some ofthat litter from the mantelpiece. Excellent, Watson! There is asugar-tongs there. Kindly raise that small ivory box with itsassistance.  Place it here among the papers. Good! You can now go andfetch Mr. Culverton Smith, of 13 Lower Burke Street."
To tell the truth, my desire to fetch a doctor had somewhat weakened,for poor Holmes was so obviously delirious that it seemed dangerousto leave him. However, he was as eager now to consult the personnamed as he had been obstinate in refusing.
"I never heard the name," said I.
"Possibly not, my good Watson. It may surprise you to know that theman upon earth who is best versed in this disease is not a medicalman, but a planter. Mr. Culverton Smith is a well-known resident ofSumatra, now visiting London. An outbreak of the disease upon hisplantation, which was distant from medical aid, caused him to studyit himself, with some rather far-reaching consequences. He is a verymethodical person, and I did not desire you to start before six,because I was well aware that you would not find him in his study. Ifyou could persuade him to come here and give us the benefit of hisunique experience of this disease, the investigation of which hasbeen his dearest hobby, I cannot doubt that he could help me."
I gave Holmes's remarks as a consecutive whole and will not attemptto indicate how they were interrupted by gaspings for breath andthose clutchings of his hands which indicated the pain from which hewas suffering. His appearance had changed for the worse during thefew hours that I had been with him. Those hectic spots were morepronounced, the eyes shone more brightly out of darker hollows, and acold sweat glimmered upon his brow. He still retained, however, thejaunty gallantry of his speech. To the last gasp he would always bethe master.
"You will tell him exactly how you have left me," said he. "You willconvey the very impression which is in your own mind--a dying man--adying and delirious man. Indeed, I cannot think why the whole bed ofthe ocean is not one solid mass of oysters, so prolific the creaturesseem. Ah, I am wondering! Strange how the brain controls the brain!What was I saying, Watson?"
"My directions for Mr. Culverton Smith."
"Ah, yes, I remember. My life depends upon it. Plead with him,Watson. There is no good feeling between us. His nephew, Watson--Ihad suspicions of foul play and I allowed him to see it. The boy diedhorribly. He has a grudge against me. You will soften him, Watson.Beg him, pray him, get him here by any means. He can save me--onlyhe!"
"I will bring him in a cab, if I have to carry him down to it."
"You will do nothing of the sort. You will persuade him to come. Andthen you will return in front of him. Make any excuse so as not tocome with him. Don't forget, Watson. You won't fail me. You never didfail me. No doubt there are natural enemies which limit the increaseof the creatures. You and I, Watson, we have done our part. Shall theworld, then, be overrun by oysters? No, no; horrible! You'll conveyall that is in your mind."
I left him full of the image of this magnificent intellect babblinglike a foolish child. He had handed me the key, and with a happythought I took it with me lest he should lock himself in. Mrs. Hudsonwas waiting, trembling and weeping, in the passage. Behind me as Ipassed from the flat I heard Holmes's high, thin voice in somedelirious chant. Below, as I stood whistling for a cab, a man came onme through the fog.
"How is Mr. Holmes, sir?" he asked.
It was an old acquaintance, Inspector Morton, of Scotland Yard,dressed in unofficial tweeds.
"He is very ill," I answered.
He looked at me in a most singular fashion. Had it not been toofiendish, I could have imagined that the gleam of the fanlight showedexultation in his face.
"I heard some rumour of it," said he.
The cab had driven up, and I left him.
Lower Burke Street proved to be a line of fine houses lying in thevague borderland between Notting Hill and Kensington. The particularone at which my cabman pulled up had an air of smug and demurerespectability in its old-fashioned iron railings, its massivefolding-door, and its shining brasswork. All was in keeping with asolemn butler who appeared framed in the pink radiance of a tintedelectrical light behind him.
"Yes, Mr. Culverton Smith is in. Dr. Watson! Very good, sir, I willtake up your card."
My humble name and title did not appear to impress Mr. CulvertonSmith. Through the half-open door I heard a high, petulant,penetrating voice.
"Who is this person? What does he want? Dear me, Staples, how oftenhave I said that I am not to be disturbed in my hours of study?"
There came a gentle flow of soothing explanation from the butler.
"Well, I won't see him, Staples. I can't have my work interruptedlike this. I am not at home. Say so. Tell him to come in the morningif he really must see me."
Again the gentle murmur.
"Well, well, give him that message. He can come in the morning, or hecan stay away. My work must not be hindered."
I thought of Holmes tossing upon his bed of sickness and counting theminutes, perhaps, until I could bring help to him. It was not a timeto stand upon ceremony. His life depended upon my promptness. Beforethe apologetic butler had delivered his message I had pushed past himand was in the room.
With a shrill cry of anger a man rose from a reclining chair besidethe fire. I saw a great yellow face, coarse-grained and greasy, withheavy, double-chin, and two sullen, menacing gray eyes which glaredat me from under tufted and sandy brows. A high bald head had a smallvelvet smoking-cap poised coquettishly upon one side of its pinkcurve. The skull was of enormous capacity, and yet as I looked down Isaw to my amazement that the figure of the man was small and frail,twisted in the shoulders and back like one who has suffered fromrickets in his childhood.
"What's this?" he cried in a high, screaming voice. "What is themeaning of this intrusion? Didn't I send you word that I would seeyou to-morrow morning?"
"I am sorry," said I, "but the matter cannot be delayed. Mr. SherlockHolmes--"
The mention of my friend's name had an extraordinary effect upon thelittle man. The look of anger passed in an instant from his face. Hisfeatures became tense and alert.
"Have you come from Holmes?" he asked.
"I have just left him."
"What about Holmes? How is he?"
"He is desperately ill. That is why I have come."
The man motioned me to a chair, and turned to resume his own. As hedid so I caught a glimpse of his face in the mirror over themantelpiece. I could have sworn that it was set in a malicious andabominable smile. Yet I persuaded myself that it must have been somenervous contraction which I had surprised, for he turned to me aninstant later with genuine concern upon his features.
"I am sorry to hear this," said he. "I only know Mr. Holmes throughsome business dealings which we have had, but I have every respectfor his talents and his character. He is an amateur of crime, as I amof disease. For him the villain, for me the microbe. There are myprisons," he continued, pointing to a row of bottles and jars whichstood upon a side table. "Among those gelatine cultivations some ofthe very worst offenders in the world are now doing time."
"It was on account of your special knowledge that Mr. Holmes desiredto see you. He has a high opinion of you and thought that you werethe one man in London who could help him."
The little man started, and the jaunty smoking-cap slid to the floor.
"Why?" he asked. "Why should Mr. Homes think that I could help him inhis trouble?"
"Because of your knowledge of Eastern diseases."
"But why should he think that this disease which he has contracted isEastern?"
"Because, in some professional inquiry, he has been working amongChinese sailors down in the docks."
Mr. Culverton Smith smiled pleasantly and picked up his smoking-cap.
"Oh, that's it--is it?" said he. "I trust the matter is not so graveas you suppose. How long has he been ill?"
"About three days."
"Is he delirious?"
"Occasionally."
"Tut, tut! This sounds serious. It would be inhuman not to answer hiscall. I very much resent any interruption to my work, Dr. Watson, butthis case is certainly exceptional. I will come with you at once."
I remembered Holmes's injunction.
"I have another appointment," said I.
"Very good. I will go alone. I have a note of Mr. Holmes's address.You can rely upon my being there within half an hour at most."
It was with a sinking heart that I reentered Holmes's bedroom. Forall that I knew the worst might have happened in my absence. To myenormous relief, he had improved greatly in the interval. Hisappearance was as ghastly as ever, but all trace of delirium had lefthim and he spoke in a feeble voice, it is true, but with even morethan his usual crispness and lucidity.
"Well, did you see him, Watson?"
"Yes; he is coming."
"Admirable, Watson! Admirable! You are the best of messengers."
"He wished to return with me."
"That would never do, Watson. That would be obviously impossible. Didhe ask what ailed me?"
"I told him about the Chinese in the East End."
"Exactly! Well, Watson, you have done all that a good friend could.You can now disappear from the scene."
"I must wait and hear his opinion, Holmes."
"Of course you must. But I have reasons to suppose that this opinionwould be very much more frank and valuable if he imagines that we arealone. There is just room behind the head of my bed, Watson."
"My dear Holmes!"
"I fear there is no alternative, Watson. The room does not lenditself to concealment, which is as well, as it is the less likely toarouse suspicion. But just there, Watson, I fancy that it could bedone." Suddenly he sat up with a rigid intentness upon his haggardface. "There are the wheels, Watson. Quick, man, if you love me! Anddon't budge, whatever happens--whatever happens, do you hear? Don'tspeak! Don't move! Just listen with all your ears." Then in aninstant his sudden access of strength departed, and his masterful,purposeful talk droned away into the low, vague murmurings of asemi-delirious man.
From the hiding-place into which I had been so swiftly hustled Iheard the footfalls upon the stair, with the opening and the closingof the bedroom door. Then, to my surprise, there came a long silence,broken only by the heavy breathings and gaspings of the sick man. Icould imagine that our visitor was standing by the bedside andlooking down at the sufferer. At last that strange hush was broken.
"Holmes!" he cried. "Holmes!" in the insistent tone of one whoawakens a sleeper. "Can't you hear me, Holmes?" There was a rustling,as if he had shaken the sick man roughly by the shoulder.
"Is that you, Mr. Smith?" Holmes whispered. "I hardly dared hope thatyou would come."
The other laughed.
"I should imagine not," he said. "And yet, you see, I am here. Coalsof fire, Holmes--coals of fire!"
"It is very good of you--very noble of you. I appreciate your specialknowledge."
Our visitor sniggered.
"You do.  You are, fortunately, the only man in London who does. Doyou know what is the matter with you?"
"The same," said Holmes.
"Ah! You recognize the symptoms?"
"Only too well."
"Well, I shouldn't be surprised, Holmes. I shouldn't be surprised ifit were the same. A bad lookout for you if it is. Poor Victor was adead man on the fourth day--a strong, hearty young fellow. It wascertainly, as you said, very surprising that he should havecontracted and out-of-the-way Asiatic disease in the heart ofLondon--a disease, too, of which I had made such a very specialstudy. Singular coincidence, Holmes. Very smart of you to notice it,but rather uncharitable to suggest that it was cause and effect."
"I knew that you did it."
"Oh, you did, did you? Well, you couldn't prove it, anyhow. But whatdo you think of yourself spreading reports about me like that, andthen crawling to me for help the moment you are in trouble? What sortof a game is that--eh?"
I heard the rasping, laboured breathing of the sick man. "Give me thewater!" he gasped.
"You're precious near your end, my friend, but I don't want you to gotill I have had a word with you. That's why I give you water. There,don't slop it about! That's right. Can you understand what I say?"
Holmes groaned.
"Do what you can for me. Let bygones be bygones," he whispered. "I'llput the words out of my head--I swear I will. Only cure me, and I'llforget it."
"Forget what?"
"Well, about Victor Savage's death. You as good as admitted just nowthat you had done it. I'll forget it."
"You can forget it or remember it, just as you like. I don't see youin the witnessbox. Quite another shaped box, my good Holmes, I assureyou. It matters nothing to me that you should know how my nephewdied. It's not him we are talking about. It's you."
"Yes, yes."
"The fellow who came for me--I've forgotten his name--said that youcontracted it down in the East End among the sailors."
"I could only account for it so."
"You are proud of your brains, Holmes, are you not? Think yourselfsmart, don't you? You came across someone who was smarter this time.Now cast your mind back, Holmes. Can you think of no other way youcould have got this thing?"
"I can't think. My mind is gone. For heaven's sake help me!"
"Yes, I will help you. I'll help you to understand just where you areand how you got there. I'd like you to know before you die."
"Give me something to ease my pain."
"Painful, is it? Yes, the coolies used to do some squealing towardsthe end. Takes you as cramp, I fancy."
"Yes, yes; it is cramp."
"Well, you can hear what I say, anyhow. Listen now! Can you rememberany unusual incident in your life just about the time your symptomsbegan?"
"No, no; nothing."
"Think again."
"I'm too ill to think."
"Well, then, I'll help you.  Did anything come by post?"
"By post?"
"A box by chance?"
"I'm fainting--I'm gone!"
"Listen, Holmes!" There was a sound as if he was shaking the dyingman, and it was all that I could do to hold myself quiet in myhiding-place. "You must hear me. You shall hear me. Do you remember abox--an ivory box? It came on Wednesday. You opened it--do youremember?"
"Yes, yes, I opened it. There was a sharp spring inside it. Somejoke--"
"It was no joke, as you will find to your cost. You fool, you wouldhave it and you have got it. Who asked you to cross my path? If youhad left me alone I would not have hurt you."
"I remember," Holmes gasped. "The spring! It drew blood. Thisbox--this on the table."
"The very one, by George! And it may as well leave the room in mypocket. There goes your last shred of evidence. But you have thetruth now, Holmes, and you can die with the knowledge that I killedyou. You knew too much of the fate of Victor Savage, so I have sentyou to share it. You are very near your end, Holmes. I will sit hereand I will watch you die."
Holmes's voice had sunk to an almost inaudible whisper.
"What is that?" said Smith. "Turn up the gas? Ah, the shadows beginto fall, do they? Yes, I will turn it up, that I may see you thebetter." He crossed the room and the light suddenly brightened. "Isthere any other little service that I can do you, my friend?"
"A match and a cigarette."
I nearly called out in my joy and my amazement. He was speaking inhis natural voice--a little weak, perhaps, but the very voice I knew.There was a long pause, and I felt that Culverton Smith was standingin silent amazement looking down at his companion.
"What's the meaning of this?" I heard him say at last in a dry,rasping tone.
"The best way of successfully acting a part is to be it," saidHolmes. "I give you my word that for three days I have tasted neitherfood nor drink until you were good enough to pour me out that glassof water. But it is the tobacco which I find most irksome. Ah, hereare some cigarettes." I heard the striking of a match. "That is verymuch better. Halloa! halloa! Do I hear the step of a friend?"
There were footfalls outside, the door opened, and Inspector Mortonappeared.
"All is in order and this is your man," said Holmes.
The officer gave the usual cautions.
"I arrest you on the charge of the murder of one Victor Savage," heconcluded.
"And you might add of the attempted murder of one Sherlock Holmes,"remarked my friend with a chuckle. "To save an invalid trouble,Inspector, Mr. Culverton Smith was good enough to give our signal byturning up the gas. By the way, the prisoner has a small box in theright-hand pocket of his coat which it would be as well to remove.Thank you. I would handle it gingerly if I were you. Put it downhere. It may play its part in the trial."
There was a sudden rush and a scuffle, followed by the clash of ironand a cry of pain.
"You'll only get yourself hurt," said the inspector. "Stand still,will you?" There was the click of the closing handcuffs.
"A nice trap!" cried the high, snarling voice. "It will bring youinto the dock, Holmes, not me. He asked me to come here to cure him.I was sorry for him and I came. Now he will pretend, no doubt, that Ihave said anything which he may invent which will corroborate hisinsane suspicions. You can lie as you like, Holmes.  My word isalways as good as yours."
"Good heavens!" cried Holmes. "I had totally forgotten him. My dearWatson, I owe you a thousand apologies. To think that I should haveoverlooked you! I need not introduce you to Mr. Culverton Smith,since I understand that you met somewhat earlier in the evening. Haveyou the cab below? I will follow you when I am dressed, for I may beof some use at the station.
"I never needed it more," said Holmes as he refreshed himself with aglass of claret and some biscuits in the intervals of his toilet."However, as you know, my habits are irregular, and such a feat meansless to me than to most men. It was very essential that I shouldimpress Mrs. Hudson with the reality of my condition, since she wasto convey it to you, and you in turn to him. You won't be offended,Watson? You will realize that among your many talents dissimulationfinds no place, and that if you had shared my secret you would neverhave been able to impress Smith with the urgent necessity of hispresence, which was the vital point of the whole scheme. Knowing hisvindictive nature, I was perfectly certain that he would come to lookupon his handiwork."
"But your appearance, Holmes--your ghastly face?"
"Three days of absolute fast does not improve one's beauty, Watson.For the rest, there is nothing which a sponge may not cure. Withvaseline upon one's forehead, belladonna in one's eyes, rouge overthe cheek-bones, and crusts of beeswax round one's lips, a verysatisfying effect can be produced. Malingering is a subject uponwhich I have sometimes thought of writing a monograph. A littleoccasional talk about half-crowns, oysters, or any other extraneoussubject produces a pleasing effect of delirium."
"But why would you not let me near you, since there was in truth noinfection?"
"Can you ask, my dear Watson? Do you imagine that I have no respectfor your medical talents? Could I fancy that your astute judgmentwould pass a dying man who, however weak, had no rise of pulse ortemperature? At four yards, I could deceive you. If I failed to doso, who would bring my Smith within my grasp? No, Watson, I would nottouch that box. You can just see if you look at it sideways where thesharp spring like a viper's tooth emerges as you open it. I dare sayit was by some such device that poor Savage, who stood between thismonster and a reversion, was done to death. My correspondence,however, is, as you know, a varied one, and I am somewhat upon myguard against any packages which reach me. It was clear to me,however, that by pretending that he had really succeeded in hisdesign I might surprise a confession. That pretence I have carriedout with the thoroughness of the true artist. Thank you, Watson, youmust help me on with my coat. When we have finished at thepolice-station I think that something nutritious at Simpson's wouldnot be out of place."





               THE DISAPPEARANCE OF LADY FRANCES CARFAX
"But why Turkish?" asked Mr. Sherlock Holmes, gazing fixedly at myboots. I was reclining in a cane-backed chair at the moment, and myprotruded feet had attracted his ever-active attention.
"English," I answered in some surprise. "I got them at Latimer's, inOxford Street."
Holmes smiled with an expression of weary patience.
"The bath!" he said; "the bath! Why the relaxing and expensiveTurkish rather than the invigorating home-made article?"
"Because for the last few days I have been feeling rheumatic and old.A Turkish bath is what we call an alterative in medicine--a freshstarting-point, a cleanser of the system.
"By the way, Holmes," I added, "I have no doubt the connectionbetween my boots and a Turkish bath is a perfectly self-evident oneto a logical mind, and yet I should be obliged to you if you wouldindicate it."
"The train of reasoning is not very obscure, Watson," said Holmeswith a mischievous twinkle. "It belongs to the same elementary classof deduction which I should illustrate if I were to ask you whoshared your cab in your drive this morning."
"I don't admit that a fresh illustration is an explanation," said Iwith some asperity.
"Bravo, Watson! A very dignified and logical remonstrance. Let mesee, what were the points? Take the last one first--the cab. Youobserve that you have some splashes on the left sleeve and shoulderof your coat. Had you sat in the centre of a hansom you wouldprobably have had no splashes, and if you had they would certainlyhave been symmetrical. Therefore it is clear that you sat at theside. Therefore it is equally clear that you had a companion."
"That is very evident."
"Absurdly commonplace, is it not?"
"But the boots and the bath?"
"Equally childish. You are in the habit of doing up your boots in acertain way. I see them on this occasion fastened with an elaboratedouble bow, which is not your usual method of tying them. You have,therefore, had them off. Who has tied them? A bootmaker--or the boyat the bath. It is unlikely that it is the bootmaker, since yourboots are nearly new. Well, what remains? The bath. Absurd, is itnot? But, for all that, the Turkish bath has served a purpose."
"What is that?"
"You say that you have had it because you need a change. Let mesuggest that you take one. How would Lausanne do, my dearWatson--first-class tickets and all expenses paid on a princelyscale?"
"Splendid! But why?"
Holmes leaned back in his armchair and took his notebook from hispocket.
"One of the most dangerous classes in the world," said he, "is thedrifting and friendless woman. She is the most harmless and often themost useful of mortals, but she is the inevitable inciter of crime inothers. She is helpless. She is migratory. She has sufficient meansto take her from country to country and from hotel to hotel. She islost, as often as not, in a maze of obscure pensions andboardinghouses. She is a stray chicken in a world of foxes. When sheis gobbled up she is hardly missed. I much fear that some evil hascome to the Lady Frances Carfax."
I was relieved at this sudden descent from the general to theparticular. Holmes consulted his notes.
"Lady Frances," he continued, "is the sole survivor of the directfamily of the late Earl of Rufton. The estates went, as you mayremember, in the male line. She was left with limited means, but withsome very remarkable old Spanish jewellery of silver and curiouslycut diamonds to which she was fondly attached--too attached, for sherefused to leave them with her banker and always carried them aboutwith her. A rather pathetic figure, the Lady Frances, a beautifulwoman, still in fresh middle age, and yet, by a strange change, thelast derelict of what only twenty years ago was a goodly fleet."
"What has happened to her, then?"
"Ah, what has happened to the Lady Frances? Is she alive or dead?There is our problem. She is a lady of precise habits, and for fouryears it has been her invariable custom to write every second week toMiss Dobney, her old governess, who has long retired and lives inCamberwell. It is this Miss Dobney who has consulted me. Nearly fiveweeks have passed without a word. The last letter was from the HotelNational at Lausanne. Lady Frances seems to have left there and givenno address. The family are anxious, and as they are exceedinglywealthy no sum will be spared if we can clear the matter up."
"Is Miss Dobney the only source of information? Surely she had othercorrespondents?"
"There is one correspondent who is a sure draw, Watson. That is thebank. Single ladies must live, and their passbooks are compresseddiaries. She banks at Silvester's. I have glanced over her account.The last check but one paid her bill at Lausanne, but it was a largeone and probably left her with cash in hand. Only one check has beendrawn since."
"To whom, and where?"
"To Miss Marie Devine. There is nothing to show where the check wasdrawn. It was cashed at the Credit Lyonnais at Montpellier less thanthree weeks ago. The sum was fifty pounds."
"And who is Miss Marie Devine?"
"That also I have been able to discover. Miss Marie Devine was themaid of Lady Frances Carfax. Why she should have paid her this checkwe have not yet determined. I have no doubt, however, that yourresearches will soon clear the matter up."
"My researches!"
"Hence the health-giving expedition to Lausanne. You know that Icannot possibly leave London while old Abrahams is in such mortalterror of his life. Besides, on general principles it is best that Ishould not leave the country. Scotland Yard feels lonely without me,and it causes an unhealthy excitement among the criminal classes. Go,then, my dear Watson, and if my humble counsel can ever be valued atso extravagant a rate as two pence a word, it waits your disposalnight and day at the end of the Continental wire."
Two days later found me at the Hotel National at Lausanne, where Ireceived every courtesy at the hands of M. Moser, the well-knownmanager. Lady Frances, as he informed me, had stayed there forseveral weeks. She had been much liked by all who met her. Her agewas not more than forty. She was still handsome and bore every signof having in her youth been a very lovely woman. M. Moser knewnothing of any valuable jewellery, but it had been remarked by theservants that the heavy trunk in the lady's bedroom was alwaysscrupulously locked. Marie Devine, the maid, was as popular as hermistress. She was actually engaged to one of the head waiters in thehotel, and there was no difficulty in getting her address. It was 11Rue de Trajan, Montpellier. All this I jotted down and felt thatHolmes himself could not have been more adroit in collecting hisfacts.
Only one corner still remained in the shadow. No light which Ipossessed could clear up the cause for the lady's sudden departure.She was very happy at Lausanne. There was every reason to believethat she intended to remain for the season in her luxurious roomsoverlooking the lake. And yet she had left at a single day's notice,which involved her in the useless payment of a week's rent. OnlyJules Vibart, the lover of the maid, had any suggestion to offer. Heconnected the sudden departure with the visit to the hotel a day ortwo before of a tall, dark, bearded man. "Un sauvage--un vritablesauvage!" cried Jules Vibart. The man had rooms somewhere in thetown. He had been seen talking earnestly to Madame on the promenadeby the lake. Then he had called. She had refused to see him. He wasEnglish, but of his name there was no record. Madame had left theplace immediately afterwards. Jules Vibart, and, what was of moreimportance, Jules Vibart's sweetheart, thought that this call and thedeparture were cause and effect. Only one thing Jules would notdiscuss. That was the reason why Marie had left her mistress. Of thathe could or would say nothing. If I wished to know, I must go toMontpellier and ask her.
So ended the first chapter of my inquiry. The second was devoted tothe place which Lady Frances Carfax had sought when she leftLausanne. Concerning this there had been some secrecy, whichconfirmed the idea that she had gone with the intention of throwingsomeone off her track. Otherwise why should not her luggage have beenopenly labelled for Baden? Both she and it reached the Rhenish spa bysome circuitous route. This much I gathered from the manager ofCook's local office. So to Baden I went, after dispatching to Holmesan account of all my proceedings and receiving in reply a telegram ofhalf-humorous commendation.
At Baden the track was not difficult to follow. Lady Frances hadstayed at the Englischer Hof for a fortnight. While there she hadmade the acquaintance of a Dr. Shlessinger and his wife, a missionaryfrom South America. Like most lonely ladies, Lady Frances found hercomfort and occupation in religion. Dr. Shlessinger's remarkablepersonality, his whole hearted devotion, and the fact that he wasrecovering from a disease contracted in the exercise of his apostolicduties affected her deeply. She had helped Mrs. Shlessinger in thenursing of the convalescent saint. He spent his day, as the managerdescribed it to me, upon a lounge-chair on the veranda, with anattendant lady upon either side of him. He was preparing a map of theHoly Land, with special reference to the kingdom of the Midianites,upon which he was writing a monograph. Finally, having improved muchin health, he and his wife had returned to London, and Lady Franceshad started thither in their company. This was just three weeksbefore, and the manager had heard nothing since. As to the maid,Marie, she had gone off some days beforehand in floods of tears,after informing the other maids that she was leaving service forever.Dr. Shlessinger had paid the bill of the whole party before hisdeparture.
"By the way," said the landlord in conclusion, "you are not the onlyfriend of Lady Frances Carfax who is inquiring after her just now.Only a week or so ago we had a man here upon the same errand."
"Did he give a name?" I asked.
"None; but he was an Englishman, though of an unusual type."
"A savage?" said I, linking my facts after the fashion of myillustrious friend.
"Exactly. That describes him very well. He is a bulky, bearded,sunburned fellow, who looks as if he would be more at home in afarmers' inn than in a fashionable hotel. A hard, fierce man, Ishould think, and one whom I should be sorry to offend."
Already the mystery began to define itself, as figures grow clearerwith the lifting of a fog. Here was this good and pious lady pursuedfrom place to place by a sinister and unrelenting figure. She fearedhim, or she would not have fled from Lausanne. He had still followed.Sooner or later he would overtake her. Had he already overtaken her?Was that the secret of her continued silence? Could the good peoplewho were her companions not screen her from his violence or hisblackmail? What horrible purpose, what deep design, lay behind thislong pursuit? There was the problem which I had to solve.
To Holmes I wrote showing how rapidly and surely I had got down tothe roots of the matter. In reply I had a telegram asking for adescription of Dr. Shlessinger's left ear. Holmes's ideas of humourare strange and occasionally offensive, so I took no notice of hisill-timed jest--indeed, I had already reached Montpellier in mypursuit of the maid, Marie, before his message came.
I had no difficulty in finding the ex-servant and in learning allthat she could tell me. She was a devoted creature, who had only lefther mistress because she was sure that she was in good hands, andbecause her own approaching marriage made a separation inevitable inany case. Her mistress had, as she confessed with distress, shownsome irritability of temper towards her during their stay in Baden,and had even questioned her once as if she had suspicions of herhonesty, and this had made the parting easier than it would otherwisehave been. Lady Frances had given her fifty pounds as awedding-present. Like me, Marie viewed with deep distrust thestranger who had driven her mistress from Lausanne. With her own eyesshe had seen him seize the lady's wrist with great violence on thepublic promenade by the lake. He was a fierce and terrible man. Shebelieved that it was out of dread of him that Lady Frances hadaccepted the escort of the Shlessingers to London. She had neverspoken to Marie about it, but many little signs had convinced themaid that her mistress lived in a state of continual nervousapprehension. So far she had got in her narrative, when suddenly shesprang from her chair and her face was convulsed with surprise andfear. "See!" she cried. "The miscreant follows still! There is thevery man of whom I speak."
Through the open sitting-room window I saw a huge, swarthy man with abristling black beard walking slowly down the centre of the streetand staring eagerly at he numbers of the houses. It was clear that,like myself, he was on the track of the maid. Acting upon the impulseof the moment, I rushed out and accosted him.
"You are an Englishman," I said.
"What if I am?" he asked with a most villainous scowl.
"May I ask what your name is?"
"No, you may not," said he with decision.
The situation was awkward, but the most direct way is often the best.
"Where is the Lady Frances Carfax?" I asked.
He stared at me with amazement.
"What have you done with her? Why have you pursued her? I insist uponan answer!" said I.
The fellow gave a below of anger and sprang upon me like a tiger. Ihave held my own in many a struggle, but the man had a grip of ironand the fury of a fiend. His hand was on my throat and my senses werenearly gone before an unshaven French ouvrier in a blue blouse dartedout from a cabaret opposite, with a cudgel in his hand, and struck myassailant a sharp crack over the forearm, which made him leave go hishold. He stood for an instant fuming with rage and uncertain whetherhe should not renew his attack. Then, with a snarl of anger, he leftme and entered the cottage from which I had just come. I turned tothank my preserver, who stood beside me in the roadway.
"Well, Watson," said he, "a very pretty hash you have made of it! Irather think you had better come back with me to London by the nightexpress."
An hour afterwards, Sherlock Holmes, in his usual garb and style, wasseated in my private room at the hotel. His explanation of his suddenand opportune appearance was simplicity itself, for, finding that hecould get away from London, he determined to head me off at the nextobvious point of my travels. In the disguise of a workingman he hadsat in the cabaret waiting for my appearance.
"And a singularly consistent investigation you have made, my dearWatson," said he. "I cannot at the moment recall any possible blunderwhich you have omitted. The total effect of your proceeding has beento give the alarm everywhere and yet to discover nothing."
"Perhaps you would have done no better," I answered bitterly.
"There is no 'perhaps' about it. I have done better. Here is the Hon.Philip Green, who is a fellow-lodger with you in this hotel, and wemay find him the starting-point for a more successful investigation."
A card had come up on a salver, and it was followed by the samebearded ruffian who had attacked me in the street. He started when hesaw me.
"What is this, Mr. Holmes?" he asked. "I had your note and I havecome. But what has this man to do with the matter?"
"This is my old friend and associate, Dr. Watson, who is helping usin this affair."
The stranger held out a huge, sunburned hand, with a few words ofapology.
"I hope I didn't harm you. When you accused me of hurting her I lostmy grip of myself. Indeed, I'm not responsible in these days. Mynerves are like live wires. But this situation is beyond me. What Iwant to know, in the first place, Mr. Holmes, is, how in the worldyou came to hear of my existence at all."
"I am in touch with Miss Dobney, Lady Frances's governess."
"Old Susan Dobney with the mob cap! I remember her well."
"And she remembers you. It was in the days before--before you foundit better to go to South Africa."
"Ah, I see you know my whole story. I need hide nothing from you. Iswear to you, Mr. Holmes, that there never was in this world a manwho loved a woman with a more wholehearted love than I had forFrances. I was a wild youngster, I know--not worse than others of myclass. But her mind was pure as snow. She could not bear a shadow ofcoarseness. So, when she came to hear of things that I had done, shewould have no more to say to me. And yet she loved me--that is thewonder of it!--loved me well enough to remain single all her sainteddays just for my sake alone. When the years had passed and I had mademy money at Barberton I thought perhaps I could seek her out andsoften her. I had heard that she was still unmarried, I found her atLausanne and tried all I knew. She weakened, I think, but her willwas strong, and when next I called she had left the town. I tracedher to Baden, and then after a time heard that her maid was here. I'ma rough fellow, fresh from a rough life, and when Dr. Watson spoke tome as he did I lost hold of myself for a moment. But for God's saketell me what has become of the Lady Frances."
"That is for us to find out," said Sherlock Holmes with peculiargravity. "What is your London address, Mr. Green?"
"The Langham Hotel will find me."
"Then may I recommend that you return there and be on hand in case Ishould want you? I have no desire to encourage false hopes, but youmay rest assured that all that can be done will be done for thesafety of Lady Frances. I can say no more for the instant. I willleave you this card so that you may be able to keep in touch with us.Now, Watson, if you will pack your bag I will cable to Mrs. Hudson tomake one of her best efforts for two hungry travellers at 7.30to-morrow."
A telegram was awaiting us when we reached our Baker Street rooms,which Holmes read with an exclamation of interest and threw across tome. "Jagged or torn," was the message, and the place of origin,Baden.
"What is this?" I asked.
"It is everything," Holmes answered. "You may remember my seeminglyirrelevant question as to this clerical gentleman's left ear. You didnot answer it."
"I had left Baden and could not inquire."
"Exactly. For this reason I sent a duplicate to the manager of theEnglischer Hof, whose answer lies here."
"What does it show?"
"It shows, my dear Watson, that we are dealing with an exceptionallyastute and dangerous man. The Rev. Dr. Shlessinger, missionary fromSouth America, is none other than Holy Peters, one of the mostunscrupulous rascals that Australia has ever evolved--and for a youngcountry it has turned out some very finished types. His particularspecialty is the beguiling of lonely ladies by playing upon theirreligious feelings, and his so-called wife, an Englishwoman namedFraser, is a worthy helpmate. The nature of his tactics suggested hisidentity to me, and this physical peculiarity--he was badly bitten ina saloon-fight at Adelaide in '89--confirmed my suspicion. This poorlady is in the hands of a most infernal couple, who will stick atnothing, Watson. That she is already dead is a very likelysupposition. If not, she is undoubtedly in some sort of confinementand unable to write to Miss Dobney or her other friends. It is alwayspossible that she never reached London, or that she has passedthrough it, but the former is improbable, as, with their system ofregistration, it is not easy for foreigners to play tricks with theContinental police; and the latter is also unlikely, as these rougescould not hope to find any other place where it would be as easy tokeep a person under restraint. All my instincts tell me that she isin London, but as we have at present no possible means of tellingwhere, we can only take the obvious steps, eat our dinner, andpossess our souls in patience. Later in the evening I will strolldown and have a word with friend Lestrade at Scotland Yard."
But neither the official police nor Holmes's own small but veryefficient organization sufficed to clear away the mystery. Amid thecrowded millions of London the three persons we sought were ascompletely obliterated as if they had never lived. Advertisementswere tried, and failed. Clues were followed, and led to nothing.Every criminal resort which Shlessinger might frequent was drawn invain. His old associates were watched, but they kept clear of him.And then suddenly, after a week of helpless suspense there came aflash of light. A silver-and-brilliant pendant of old Spanish designhad been pawned at Bovington's, in Westminster Road. The pawner was alarge, clean-shaven man of clerical appearance. His name and addresswere demonstrably false. The ear had escaped notice, but thedescription was surely that of Shlessinger.
Three times had our bearded friend from the Langham called fornews--the third time within an hour of this fresh development. Hisclothes were getting looser on his great body. He seemed to bewilting away in his anxiety. "If you will only give me something todo!" was his constant wail. At last Holmes could oblige him.
"He has begun to pawn the jewels. We should get him now."
"But does this mean that any harm has befallen the Lady Frances?"
Holmes shook his head very gravely.
"Supposing that they have held her prisoner up to now, it is clearthat they cannot let her loose without their own destruction. We mustprepare for the worst."
"What can I do?"
"These people do not know you by sight?"
"No."
"It is possible that he will go to some other pawnbroker in thefuture. in that case, we must begin again. On the other hand, he hashad a fair price and no questions asked, so if he is in need ofready-money he will probably come back to Bovington's. I will giveyou a note to them, and they will let you wait in the shop. If thefellow comes you will follow him home. But no indiscretion, and,above all, no violence. I put you on your honour that you will takeno step without my knowledge and consent."
For two days the Hon. Philip Green (he was, I may mention, the son ofthe famous admiral of that name who commanded the Sea of Azof fleetin the Crimean War) brought us no news. On the evening of the thirdhe rushed into our sitting-room, pale, trembling, with every muscleof his powerful frame quivering with excitement.
"We have him! We have him!" he cried.
He was incoherent in his agitation. Holmes soothed him with a fewwords and thrust him into an armchair.
"Come, now, give us the order of events," said he.
"She came only an hour ago. It was the wife, this time, but thependant she brought was the fellow of the other. She is a tall, palewoman, with ferret eyes."
"That is the lady," said Holmes.
"She left the office and I followed her. She walked up the KenningtonRoad, and I kept behind her. Presently she went into a shop. Mr.Holmes, it was an undertaker's."
My companion started. "Well?" he asked in that vibrant voice whichtold of the fiery soul behind the cold gray face.
"She was talking to the woman behind the counter. I entered as well.'It is late,' I heard her say, or words to that effect. The woman wasexcusing herself. 'It should be there before now,' she answered. 'Ittook longer, being out of the ordinary.' They both stopped and lookedat me, so I asked some questions and then left the shop."
"You did excellently well. What happened next?"
"The woman came out, but I had hid myself in a doorway. Hersuspicions had been aroused, I think, for she looked round her. Thenshe called a cab and got in. I was lucky enough to get another and soto follow her. She got down at last at No. 36, Poultney Square,Brixton. I drove past, left my cab at the corner of the square, andwatched the house."
"Did you see anyone?"
"The windows were all in darkness save one on the lower floor. Theblind was down, and I could not see in. I was standing there,wondering what I should do next, when a covered van drove up with twomen in it. They descended, took something out of the van, and carriedit up the steps to the hall door. Mr. Holmes, it was a coffin."
"Ah!"
"For an instant I was on the point of rushing in. The door had beenopened to admit the men and their burden. It was the woman who hadopened it. But as I stood there she caught a glimpse of me, and Ithink that she recognized me. I saw her start, and she hastily closedthe door. I remembered my promise to you, and here I am."
"You have done excellent work," said Holmes, scribbling a few wordsupon a half-sheet of paper. "We can do nothing legal without awarrant, and you can serve the cause best by taking this note down tothe authorities and getting one. There may be some difficulty, but Ishould think that the sale of the jewellery should be sufficient.Lestrade will see to all details."
"But they may murder her in the meanwhile. What could the coffinmean, and for whom could it be but for her?"
"We will do all that can be done, Mr. Green. Not a moment will belost. Leave it in our hands. Now Watson," he added as our clienthurried away, "he will set the regular forces on the move. We are, asusual, the irregulars, and we must take our own line of action. Thesituation strikes me as so desperate that the most extreme measuresare justified. Not a moment is to be lost in getting to PoultneySquare.
"Let us try to reconstruct the situation," said he as we droveswiftly past the Houses of Parliament and over Westminster Bridge."These villains have coaxed this unhappy lady to London, after firstalienating her from her faithful maid. If she has written any lettersthey have been intercepted. Through some confederate they haveengaged a furnished house. Once inside it, they have made her aprisoner, and they have become possessed of the valuable jewellerywhich has been their object from the first. Already they have begunto sell part of it, which seems safe enough to them, since they haveno reason to think that anyone is interested in the lady's fate. Whenshe is released she will, of course, denounce them. Therefore, shemust not be released. But they cannot keep her under lock and keyforever. So murder is their only solution."
"That seems very clear."
"Now we will take another line of reasoning. When you follow twoseparate chains of thought, Watson, you will find some point ofintersection which should approximate to the truth. We will startnow, not from the lady but from the coffin and argue backward. Thatincident proves, I fear, beyond all doubt that the lady is dead. Itpoints also to an orthodox burial with proper accompaniment ofmedical certificate and official sanction. Had the lady beenobviously murdered, they would have buried her in a hole in the backgarden. But here all is open and regular. What does this mean? Surelythat they have done her to death in some way which has deceived thedoctor and simulated a natural end--poisoning, perhaps. And yet howstrange that they should ever let a doctor approach her unless hewere a confederate, which is hardly a credible proposition."
"Could they have forged a medical certificate?"
"Dangerous, Watson, very dangerous. No, I hardly see them doing that.Pull up, cabby! This is evidently the undertaker's, for we have justpassed the pawnbroker's. Would go in, Watson? Your appearanceinspires confidence. Ask what hour the Poultney Square funeral takesplace to-morrow."
The woman in the shop answered me without hesitation that it was tobe at eight o'clock in the morning. "You see, Watson, no mystery;everything above-board! In some way the legal forms have undoubtedlybeen complied with, and they think that they have little to fear.Well, there's nothing for it now but a direct frontal attack. Are youarmed?"
"My stick!"
"Well, well, we shall be strong enough. 'Thrice is he armed who hathhis quarrel just.' We simply can't afford to wait for the police orto keep within the four corners of the law. You can drive off, cabby.Now, Watson, we'll just take our luck together, as we haveoccasionally in the past."
He had rung loudly at the door of a great dark house in the centre ofPoultney Square. It was opened immediately, and the figure of a tallwoman was outlined against the dim-lit hall.
"Well, what do you want?" she asked sharply, peering at us throughthe darkness.
"I want to speak to Dr. Shlessinger," said Holmes.
"There is no such person here," she answered, and tried to close thedoor, but Holmes had jammed it with his foot.
"Well, I want to see the man who lives here, whatever he may callhimself," said Holmes firmly.
She hesitated. Then she threw open the door. "Well, come in!" saidshe. "My husband is not afraid to face any man in the world." Sheclosed the door behind us and showed us into a sitting-room on theright side of the hall, turning up the gas as she left us. "Mr.Peters will be with you in an instant," she said.
Her words were literally true, for we had hardly time to look aroundthe dusty and moth-eaten apartment in which we found ourselves beforethe door opened and a big, clean-shaven bald-headed man steppedlightly into the room. He had a large red face, with pendulouscheeks, and a general air of superficial benevolence which was marredby a cruel, vicious mouth.
"There is surely some mistake here, gentlemen," he said in anunctuous, make-everything-easy voice. "I fancy that you have beenmisdirected. Possibly if you tried farther down the street--"
"That will do; we have no time to waste," said my companion firmly."You are Henry Peters, of Adelaide, late the Rev. Dr. Shlessinger, ofBaden and South America. I am as sure of that as that my own name isSherlock Holmes."
Peters, as I will now call him, started and stared hard at hisformidable pursuer. "I guess your name does not frighten me, Mr.Holmes," said he coolly. "When a man's conscience is easy you can'trattle him. What is your business in my house?"
"I want to know what you have done with the Lady Frances Carfax, whomyou brought away with you from Baden."
"I'd be very glad if you could tell me where that lady may be,"Peters answered coolly. "I've a bill against her for a nearly ahundred pounds, and nothing to show for it but a couple of trumperypendants that the dealer would hardly look at. She attached herselfto Mrs. Peters and me at Baden--it is a fact that I was using anothername at the time--and she stuck on to us until we came to London. Ipaid her bill and her ticket. Once in London, she gave us the slip,and, as I say, left these out-of-date jewels to pay her bills. Youfind her, Mr. Holmes, and I'm your debtor."
In mean to find her," said Sherlock Holmes. "I'm going through thishouse till I do find her."
"Where is your warrant?"
Holmes half drew a revolver from his pocket. "This will have to servetill a better one comes."
"Why, you're a common burglar."
"So you might describe me," said Holmes cheerfully. "My companion isalso a dangerous ruffian. And together we are going through yourhouse."
Our opponent opened the door.
"Fetch a policeman, Annie!" said he. There was a whisk of feminineskirts down the passage, and the hall door was opened and shut.
"Our time is limited, Watson," said Holmes. "If you try to stop us,Peters, you will most certainly get hurt. Where is that coffin whichwas brought into your house?"
"What do you want with the coffin? It is in use. There is a body init."
"I must see the body."
"Never with my consent."
"Then without it." With a quick movement Holmes pushed the fellow toone side and passed into the hall. A door half opened stoodimmediately before us. We entered. It was the dining-room. On thetable, under a half-lit chandelier, the coffin was lying. Holmesturned up the gas and raised the lid. Deep down in the recesses ofthe coffin lay an emaciated figure. The glare from the lights abovebeat down upon an aged and withered face. By no possible process ofcruelty, starvation, or disease could this wornout wreck be the stillbeautiful Lady Frances. Holmes's face showed his amazement, and alsohis relief.
"Thank God!" he muttered. "It's someone else."
"Ah, you've blundered badly for once, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," saidPeters, who had followed us into the room.
"Who is the dead woman?"
"Well, if you really must know, she is an old nurse of my wife's,Rose Spender by name, whom we found in the Brixton WorkhouseInfirmary. We brought her round here, called in Dr. Horsom, of 13Firbank Villas--mind you take the address, Mr. Holmes--and had hercarefully tended, as Christian folk should. On the third day shedied--certificate says senile decay--but that's only the doctor'sopinion, and of course you know better. We ordered her funeral to becarried out by Stimson and Co., of the Kennington Road, who will buryher at eight o'clock to-morrow morning. Can you pick any hole inthat, Mr. Holmes? You've made a silly blunder, and you may as wellown up to it. I'd give something for a photograph of your gaping,staring face when you pulled aside that lid expecting to see the LadyFrances Carfax and only found a poor old woman of ninety."
Holmes's expression was as impassive as ever under the jeers of hisantagonist, but his clenched hands betrayed his acute annoyance.
"I am going through your house," said he.
"Are you, though!" cried Peters as a woman's voice and heavy stepssounded in the passage. "We'll soon see about that. This way,officers, if you please. These men have forced their way into myhouse, and I cannot get rid of them. Help me to put them out."
A sergeant and a constable stood in the doorway. Holmes drew his cardfrom his case.
"This is my name and address. This is my friend, Dr. Watson."
"Bless you, sir, we know you very well," said the sergeant, "but youcan't stay here without a warrant."
"Of course not. I quite understand that."
"Arrest him!" cried Peters.
"We know where to lay our hands on this gentleman if he is wanted,"said the sergeant majestically, "but you'll have to go, Mr. Holmes."
"Yes, Watson, we shall have to go."
A minute later we were in the street once more. Holmes was as cool asever, but I was hot with anger and humiliation. The sergeant hadfollowed us.
"Sorry, Mr. Holmes, but that's the law."
"Exactly, Sergeant, you could not do otherwise."
"I expect there was good reason for your presence there. If there isanything I can do--"
"It's a missing lady, Sergeant, and we think she is in that house. Iexpect a warrant presently."
"Then I'll keep my eye on the parties, Mr. Holmes. If anything comesalong, I will surely let you know."
It was only nine o'clock, and we were off full cry upon the trail atonce. First we drove to Brixton Workhoused Infirmary, where we foundthat it was indeed the truth that a charitable couple had called somedays before, that they had claimed an imbecile old woman as a formerservant, and that they had obtained permission to take her away withthem. No surprise was expressed at the news that she had since died.
The doctor was our next goal. He had been called in, had found thewoman dying of pure senility, had actually seen her pass away, andhad signed the certificate in due form. "I assure you that everythingwas perfectly normal and there was no room for foul play in thematter," said he. Nothing in the house had struck him as suspicioussave that for people of their class it was remarkable that theyshould have no servant. So far and no further went the doctor.
Finally we found our way to Scotland Yard. There had beendifficulties of procedure in regard to the warrant. Some delay wasinevitable. The magistrate's signature might not be obtained untilnext morning. If Holmes would call about nine he could go down withLestrade and see it acted upon. So ended the day, save that nearmidnight our friend, the sergeant, called to say that he had seenflickering lights here and there in the windows of the great darkhouse, but that no one had left it and none had entered. We could butpray for patience and wait for the morrow.
Sherlock Holmes was too irritable for conversation and too restlessfor sleep. I left him smoking hard, with his heavy, dark browsknotted together, and his long, nervous fingers tapping upon the armsof his chair, as he turned over in his mind every possible solutionof the mystery. Several times in the course of the night I heard himprowling about the house. Finally, just after I had been called inthe morning, he rushed into my room. He was in his dressing-gown, buthis pale, hollow-eyed face told me that his night had been asleepless one.
"What time was the funeral? Eight, was it not?" he asked eagerly."Well, it is 7.20 now. Good heavens, Watson, what has become of anybrains that God has given me? Quick, man, quick! It's life ordeath--a hundred chances on death to one on life. I'll never forgivemyself, never, if we are too late!"
Five minutes had not passed before we were flying in a hansom downBaker Street. But even so it was twenty-five to eight as we passedBig Ben, and eight struck as we tore down the Brixton Road. Butothers were late as well as we. Ten minutes after the hour the hearsewas still standing at the door of the house, and even as our foaminghorse came to a halt the coffin, supported by three men, appeared onthe threshold. Holmes darted forward and barred their way.
"Take it back!" he cried, laying his hand on the breast of theforemost. "Take it back this instant!"
"What the devil do you mean? Once again I ask you, where is yourwarrant?" shouted the furious Peters, his big red face glaring overthe farther end of the coffin.
"The warrant is on its way. The coffin shall remain in the houseuntil it comes."
The authority in Holmes's voice had its effect upon the bearers.Peters had suddenly vanished into the house, and they obeyed thesenew orders. "Quick, Watson, quick! Here is a screw-driver!" heshouted as the coffin was replaced upon the table. "Here's one foryou, my man! A sovreign if the lid comes off in a minute! Ask noquestions--work away! That's good! Another! And another! Now pull alltogether! It's giving! It's giving! Ah, that does it at last."
With a united effort we tore off the coffin-lid. As we did so therecame from the inside a stupefying and overpowering smell ofchloroform. A body lay within, its head all wreathed in cotton-wool,which had been soaked in the narcotic. Holmes plucked it off anddisclosed the statuesque face of a handsome and spiritual woman ofmiddle age. In an instant he had passed his arm round the figure andraised her to a sitting position.
"Is she gone, Watson? Is there a spark left? Surely we are not toolate!"
For half an hour it seemed that we were. What with actualsuffocation, and what with the poisonous fumes of the chloroform, theLady Frances seemed to have passed the last point of recall. Andthen, at last, with artificial respiration, with injected ether, andwith every device that science could suggest, some flutter of life,some quiver of the eyelids, some dimming of a mirror, spoke of theslowly returning life. A cab had driven up, and Holmes, parting theblind, looked out at it. "Here is Lestrade with his warrant," saidhe. "He will find that his birds have flown. And here," he added as aheavy step hurried along the passage, "is someone who has a betterright to nurse this lady than we have. Good morning, Mr. Green; Ithink that the sooner we can move the Lady Frances the better.Meanwhile, the funeral may proceed, and the poor old woman who stilllies in that coffin may go to her last resting-place alone."
"Should you care to add the case to your annals, my dear Watson,"said Holmes that evening, "it can only be as an example of thattemporary eclipse to which even the best-balanced mind may beexposed. Such slips are common to all mortals, and the greatest is hewho can recognize and repair them. To this modified credit I may,perhaps, make some claim. My night was haunted by the thought thatsomewhere a clue, a strange sentence, a curious observation, had comeunder my notice and had been too easily dismissed. Then, suddenly, inthe gray of the morning, the words came back to me. It was the remarkof the undertaker's wife, as reported by Philip Green. She had said,'It should be there before now. It took longer, being out of theordinary.' It was the coffin of which she spoke. It had been out ofthe ordinary. That could only mean that it had been made to somespecial measurement. But why? Why? Then in an instant I rememberedthe deep sides, and the little wasted figure at the bottom. Why solarge a coffin for so small a body? To leave room for another body.Both would be buried under the one certificate. It had all been soclear, if only my own sight had not been dimmed. At eight the LadyFrances would be buried. Our one chance was to stop the coffin beforeit left the house.
"It was a desperate chance that we might find her alive, but it was achance, as the result showed. These people had never, to myknowledge, done a murder. They might shrink from actual violence atthe last. The could bury her with no sign of how she met her end, andeven if she were exhumed there was a chance for them. I hoped thatsuch considerations might prevail with them. You can reconstruct thescene well enough. You saw the horrible den upstairs, where the poorlady had been kept so long. They rushed in and overpowered her withtheir chloroform, carried her down, poured more into the coffin toinsure against her waking, and then screwed down the lid. A cleverdevice, Watson. It is new to me in the annals of crime. If ourex-missionary friends escape the clutches of Lestrade, I shall expectto hear of some brilliant incidents in their future career."





                   THE ADVENTURE OF THE DEVIL'S FOOT
In recording from time to time some of the curious experiences andinteresting recollections which I associate with my long and intimatefriendship with Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I have continually been faced bydifficulties caused by his own aversion to publicity. To his sombreand cynical spirit all popular applause was always abhorrent, andnothing amused him more at the end of a successful case than to handover the actual exposure to some orthodox official, and to listenwith a mocking smile to the general chorus of misplacedcongratulation. It was indeed this attitude upon the part of myfriend and certainly not any lack of interesting material which hascaused me of late years to lay very few of my records before thepublic. My participation in some if his adventures was always aprivilege which entailed discretion and reticence upon me.
It was, then, with considerable surprise that I received a telegramfrom Homes last Tuesday--he has never been known to write where atelegram would serve--in the following terms:
Why not tell them of the Cornish horror--strangest case I havehandled.I have no idea what backward sweep of memory had brought the matterfresh to his mind, or what freak had caused him to desire that Ishould recount it; but I hasten, before another cancelling telegrammay arrive, to hunt out the notes which give me the exact details ofthe case and to lay the narrative before my readers.
It was, then, in the spring of the year 1897 that Holmes's ironconstitution showed some symptoms of giving way in the face ofconstant hard work of a most exacting kind, aggravated, perhaps, byoccasional indiscretions of his own. In March of that year Dr. MooreAgar, of Harley Street, whose dramatic introduction to Holmes I maysome day recount, gave positive injunctions that the famous privateagent lay aside all his cases and surrender himself to complete restif he wished to avert an absolute breakdown. The state of his healthwas not a matter in which he himself took the faintest interest, forhis mental detachment was absolute, but he was induced at last, onthe threat of being permanently disqualified from work, to givehimself a complete change of scene and air. Thus it was that in theearly spring of that year we found ourselves together in a smallcottage near Poldhu Bay, at the further extremity of the Cornishpeninsula.
It was a singular spot, and one peculiarly well suited to the grimhumour of my patient. From the windows of our little whitewashedhouse, which stood high upon a grassy headland, we looked down uponthe whole sinister semicircle of Mounts Bay, that old death trap ofsailing vessels, with its fringe of black cliffs and surge-sweptreefs on which innumerable seamen have met their end. With anortherly breeze it lies placid and sheltered, inviting thestorm-tossed craft to tack into it for rest and protection.
Then come the sudden swirl round of the wind, the blistering galefrom the south-west, the dragging anchor, the lee shore, and the lastbattle in the creaming breakers. The wise mariner stands far out fromthat evil place.
On the land side our surroundings were as sombre as on the sea. Itwas a country of rolling moors, lonely and dun-colored, with anoccasional church tower to mark the site of some old-world village.In every direction upon these moors there were traces of somevanished race which had passed utterly away, and left as it solerecord strange monuments of stone, irregular mounds which containedthe burned ashes of the dead, and curious earthworks which hinted atprehistoric strife. The glamour and mystery of the place, with itssinister atmosphere of forgotten nations, appealed to the imaginationof my friend, and he spent much of his time in long walks andsolitary meditations upon the moor. The ancient Cornish language hadalso arrested his attention, and he had, I remember, conceived theidea that it was akin to the Chaldean, and had been largely derivedfrom the Phoenician traders in tin. He had received a consignment ofbooks upon philology and was settling down to develop this thesiswhen suddenly, to my sorrow and to his unfeigned delight, we foundourselves, even in that land of dreams, plunged into a problem at ourvery doors which was more intense, more engrossing, and infinitelymore mysterious than any of those which had driven us from London.Our simple life and peaceful, healthy routine were violentlyinterrupted, and we were precipitated into the midst of a series ofevents which caused the utmost excitement not only in Cornwall butthroughout the whole west of England. Many of my readers may retainsome recollection of what was called at the time "The CornishHorror," though a most imperfect account of the matter reached theLondon press. Now, after thirteen years, I will give the true detailsof this inconceivable affair to the public.
I have said that scattered towers marked the villages which dottedthis part of Cornwall. The nearest of these was the hamlet ofTredannick Wollas, where the cottages of a couple of hundredinhabitants clustered round an ancient, moss-grown church. The vicarof the parish, Mr. Roundhay, was something of an archaeologist, andas such Holmes had made his acquaintance. He was a middle-aged man,portly and affable, with a considerable fund of local lore. At hisinvitation we had taken tea at the vicarage and had come to know,also, Mr. Mortimer Tregennis, an independent gentleman, who increasedthe clergyman's scanty resources by taking rooms in his large,straggling house. The vicar, being a bachelor, was glad to come tosuch an arrangement, though he had little in common with his lodger,who was a thin, dark, spectacled man, with a stoop which gave theimpression of actual, physical deformity. I remember that during ourshort visit we found the vicar garrulous, but his lodger strangelyreticent, a sad-faced, introspective man, sitting with averted eyes,brooding apparently upon his own affairs.
These were the two men who entered abruptly into our littlesitting-room on Tuesday, March the 16th, shortly after our breakfasthour, as we were smoking together, preparatory to our daily excursionupon the moors.
"Mr. Holmes," said the vicar in an agitated voice, "the mostextraordinary and tragic affair has occurred during the night. It isthe most unheard-of business. We can only regard it as a specialProvidence that you should chance to be here at the time, for in allEngland you are the one man we need."
I glared at the intrusive vicar with no very friendly eyes; butHolmes took his pipe from his lips and sat up in his chair like anold hound who hears the view-halloa. He waved his hand to the sofa,and our palpitating visitor with his agitated companion sat side byside upon it. Mr. Mortimer Tregennis was more self-contained than theclergyman, but the twitching of his thin hands and the brightness ofhis dark eyes showed that they shared a common emotion.
"Shall I speak or you?" he asked of the vicar.
"Well, as you seem to have made the discovery, whatever it may be,and the vicar to have had it second-hand, perhaps you had better dothe speaking," said Holmes.
I glanced at the hastily clad clergyman, with the formally dressedlodger seated beside him, and was amused at the surprise whichHolmes's simple deduction had brought to their faces.
"Perhaps I had best say a few words first," said the vicar, "and thenyou can judge if you will listen to the details from Mr. Tregennis,or whether we should not hasten at once to the scene of thismysterious affair. I may explain, then, that our friend here spentlast evening in the company of his two brothers, Owen and George, andof his sister Brenda, at their house of Tredannick Wartha, which isnear the old stone cross upon the moor. He left them shortly afterten o'clock, playing cards round the dining-room table, in excellenthealth and spirits. This morning, being an early riser, he walked inthat direction before breakfast and was overtaken by the carriage ofDr. Richards, who explained that he had just been sent for on a mosturgent call to Tredannick Wartha. Mr. Mortimer Tregennis naturallywent with him. When he arrived at Tredannick Wartha he found anextraordinary state of things. His two brothers and his sister wereseated round the table exactly as he had left them, the cards stillspread in front of them and the candles burned down to their sockets.The sister lay back stone-dead in her chair, while the two brotherssat on each side of her laughing, shouting, and singing, the sensesstricken clean out of them. All three of them, the dead woman and thetwo demented men, retained upon their faces an expression of theutmost horror--a convulsion of terror which was dreadful to lookupon. There was no sign of the presence of anyone in the house,except Mrs. Porter, the old cook and housekeeper, who declared thatshe had slept deeply and heard no sound during the night. Nothing hadbeen stolen or disarranged, and there is absolutely no explanation ofwhat the horror can be which has frightened a woman to death and twostrong men out of their senses. There is the situation, Mr. Holmes,in a nutshell, and if you can help us to clear it up you will havedone a great work."
I had hoped that in some way I could coax my companion back into thequiet which had been the object of our journey; but one glance at hisintense face and contracted eyebrows told me how vain was now theexpectation. He sat for some little time in silence, absorbed in thestrange drama which had broken in upon our peace.
"I will look into this matter," he said at last. "On the face of it,it would appear to be a case of a very exceptional nature. Have youbeen there yourself, Mr. Roundhay?"
"No, Mr. Holmes. Mr. Tregennis brought back the account to thevicarage, and I at once hurried over with him to consult you."
"How far is it to the house where this singular tragedy occurred?"
"About a mile inland."
"Then we shall walk over together. But before we start I must ask youa few questions, Mr. Mortimer Tregennis."
The other had been silent all this time, but I had observed that hismore controlled excitement was even greater than the obtrusiveemotion of the clergyman. He sat with a pale, drawn face, his anxiousgaze fixed upon Holmes, and his thin hands clasped convulsivelytogether. His pale lips quivered as he listened to the dreadfulexperience which had befallen his family, and his dark eyes seemed toreflect something of the horror of the scene.
"Ask what you like, Mr. Holmes," said he eagerly. "It is a bad thingto speak of, but I will answer you the truth."
"Tell me about last night."
"Well, Mr. Holmes, I supped there, as the vicar has said, and myelder brother George proposed a game of whist afterwards. We sat downabout nine o'clock. It was a quarter-past ten when I moved to go. Ileft them all round the table, as merry as could be."
"Who let you out?"
"Mrs. Porter had gone to bed, so I let myself out. I shut the halldoor behind me. The window of the room in which they sat was closed,but the blind was not drawn down. There was no change in door orwindow this morning, or any reason to think that any stranger hadbeen to the house. Yet there they sat, driven clean mad with terror,and Brenda lying dead of fright, with her head hanging over the armof the chair. I'll never get the sight of that room out of my mind solong as I live."
"The facts, as you state them, are certainly most remarkable," saidHolmes. "I take it that you have no theory yourself which can in anyway account for them?"
"It's devilish, Mr. Holmes, devilish!" cried Mortimer Tregennis. "Itis not of this world. Something has come into that room which hasdashed the light of reason from their minds. What human contrivancecould do that?"
"I fear," said Holmes, "that if the matter is beyond humanity it iscertainly beyond me. Yet we must exhaust all natural explanationsbefore we fall back upon such a theory as this. As to yourself, Mr.Tregennis, I take it you were divided in some way from your family,since they lived together and you had rooms apart?"
"That is so, Mr. Holmes, though the matter is past and done with. Wewere a family of tin-miners at Redruth, but we sold our venture to acompany, and so retired with enough to keep us. I won't deny thatthere was some feeling about the division of the money and it stoodbetween us for a time, but it was all forgiven and forgotten, and wewere the best of friends together."
"Looking back at the evening which you spent together, does anythingstand out in your memory as throwing any possible light upon thetragedy? Think carefully, Mr. Tregennis, for any clue which can helpme."
"There is nothing at all, sir."
"Your people were in their usual spirits?"
"Never better."
"Were they nervous people? Did they ever show any apprehension ofcoming danger?"
"Nothing of the kind."
"You have nothing to add then, which could assist me?"
Mortimer Tregennis considered earnestly for a moment.
"There is one thing occurs to me," said he at last. "As we sat at thetable my back was to the window, and my brother George, he being mypartner at cards, was facing it. I saw him once look hard over myshoulder, so I turned round and looked also. The blind was up and thewindow shut, but I could just make out the bushes on the lawn, and itseemed to me for a moment that I saw something moving among them. Icouldn't even say if it was man or animal, but I just thought therewas something there. When I asked him what he was looking at, he toldme that he had the same feeling. That is all that I can say."
"Did you not investigate?"
"No; the matter passed as unimportant."
"You left them, then, without any premonition of evil?"
"None at all."
"I am not clear how you came to hear the news so early this morning."
"I am an early riser and generally take a walk before breakfast. Thismorning I had hardly started when the doctor in his carriage overtookme. He told me that old Mrs. Porter had sent a boy down with anurgent message. I sprang in beside him and we drove on. When we gotthere we looked into that dreadful room. The candles and the firemust have burned out hours before, and they had been sitting there inthe dark until dawn had broken. The doctor said Brenda must have beendead at least six hours. There were no signs of violence. She justlay across the arm of the chair with that look on her face. Georgeand Owen were singing snatches of songs and gibbering like two greatapes. Oh, it was awful to see! I couldn't stand it, and the doctorwas as white as a sheet. Indeed, he fell into a chair in a sort offaint, and we nearly had him on our hands as well."
"Remarkable--most remarkable!" said Holmes, rising and taking hishat. "I think, perhaps, we had better go down to Tredannick Warthawithout further delay. I confess that I have seldom known a casewhich at first sight presented a more singular problem."
Our proceedings of that first morning did little to advance theinvestigation. It was marked, however, at the outset by an incidentwhich left the most sinister impression upon my mind. The approach tothe spot at which the tragedy occurred is down a narrow, winding,country lane. While we made our way along it we heard the rattle of acarriage coming towards us and stood aside to let it pass. As itdrove by us I caught a glimpse through the closed window of ahorribly contorted, grinning face glaring out at us. Those staringeyes and gnashing teeth flashed past us like a dreadful vision.
"My brothers!" cried Mortimer Tregennis, white to his lips. "They aretaking them to Helston."
We looked with horror after the black carriage, lumbering upon itsway. Then we turned our steps towards this ill-omened house in whichthey had met their strange fate.
It was a large and bright dwelling, rather a villa than a cottage,with a considerable garden which was already, in that Cornish air,well filled with spring flowers. Towards this garden the window ofthe sitting-room fronted, and from it, according to MortimerTregennis, must have come that thing of evil which had by sheerhorror in a single instant blasted their minds. Holmes walked slowlyand thoughtfully among the flower-plots and along the path before weentered the porch. So absorbed was he in his thoughts, I remember,that he stumbled over the watering-pot, upset its contents, anddeluged both our feet and the garden path. Inside the house we weremet by the elderly Cornish housekeeper, Mrs. Porter, who, with theaid of a young girl, looked after the wants of the family. Shereadily answered all Holmes's questions. She had heard nothing in thenight. Her employers had all been in excellent spirits lately, andshe had never known them more cheerful and prosperous. She hadfainted with horror upon entering the room in the morning and seeingthat dreadful company round the table. She had, when she recovered,thrown open the window to let the morning air in, and had run down tothe lane, whence she sent a farm-lad for the doctor. The lady was onher bed upstairs if we cared to see her. It took four strong men toget the brothers into the asylum carriage. She would not herself stayin the house another day and was starting that very afternoon torejoin her family at St. Ives.
We ascended the stairs and viewed the body. Miss Brenda Tregennis hadbeen a very beautiful girl, though now verging upon middle age. Herdark, clear-cut face was handsome, even in death, but there stilllingered upon it something of that convulsion of horror which hadbeen her last human emotion. From her bedroom we descended to thesitting-room, where this strange tragedy had actually occurred. Thecharred ashes of the overnight fire lay in the grate. On the tablewere the four guttered and burned-out candles, with the cardsscattered over its surface. The chairs had been moved back againstthe walls, but all else was as it had been the night before. Holmespaced with light, swift steps about the room; he sat in the variouschairs, drawing them up and reconstructing their positions. He testedhow much of the garden was visible; he examined the floor, theceiling, and the fireplace; but never once did I see that suddenbrightening of his eyes and tightening of his lips which would havetold me that he saw some gleam of light in this utter darkness.
"Why a fire?" he asked once. "Had they always a fire in this smallroom on a spring evening?"
Mortimer Tregennis explained that the night was cold and damp. Forthat reason, after his arrival, the fire was lit. "What are you goingto do now, Mr. Holmes?" he asked.
My friend smiled and laid his hand upon my arm. "I think, Watson,that I shall resume that course of tobacco-poisoning which you haveso often and so justly condemned," said he. "With your permission,gentlemen, we will now return to our cottage, for I am not aware thatany new factor is likely to come to our notice here. I will turn thefacts over in my mid, Mr, Tregennis, and should anything occur to meI will certainly ommunicate with you and the vicar. In the meantime Iwish you both good-morning."
It was not until long after we were back in Poldhu Cottage thatHolmes broke his complete and absorbed silence. He sat coiled in hisarmchair, his haggard and ascetic face hardly visible amid the blueswirl of his tobacco smoke, his black brows drawn down, his foreheadcontracted, his eyes vacant and far away. Finally he laid down hispipe and sprang to his feet.
"It won't do, Watson!" said he with a laugh. "Let us walk along thecliffs together and search for flint arrows. We are more likely tofind them than clues to this problem. To let the brain work withoutsufficient material is like racing an engine. It racks itself topieces. The sea air, sunshine, and patience, Watson--all else willcome.
"Now, let us calmly define our position, Watson," he continued as weskirted the cliffs together. "Let us get a firm grip of the verylittle which we do know, so that when fresh facts arise we may beready to fit them into their places. I take it, in the first place,that neither of us is prepared to admit diabolical intrusions intothe affairs of men. Let us begin by ruling that entirely out of ourminds. Very good. There remain three persons who have been grievouslystricken by some conscious or unconscious human agency. That is firmground. Now, when did this occur? Evidently, assuming his narrativeto be true, it was immediately after Mr. Mortimer Tregennis had leftthe room. That is a very important point. The presumption is that itwas within a few minutes afterwards. The cards still lay upon thetable. It was already past their usual hour for bed. Yet they had notchanged their position or pushed back their chairs. I repeat, then,that the occurrence was immediately after his departure, and notlater than eleven o'clock last night.
"Our next obvious step is to check, so far as we can, the movementsof Mortimer Tregennis after he left the room. In this there is nodifficulty, and they seem to be above suspicion. Knowing my methodsas you do, you were, of course, conscious of the somewhat clumsywater-pot expedient by which I obtained a clearer impress of his footthan might otherwise have been possible. The wet, sandy path took itadmirably. Last night was also wet, you will remember, and it was notdifficult--having obtained a sample print--to pick out his trackamong others and to follow his movements. He appears to have walkedaway swiftly in the direction of the vicarage.
"If, then, Mortimer Tregennis disappeared from the scene, and yetsome outside person affected the card-players, how can we reconstructthat person, and how was such an impression of horror conveyed? Mrs.Porter may be eliminated. She is evidently harmless. Is there anyevidence that someone crept up to the garden window and in somemanner produced so terrific an effect that he drove those who saw itout of their senses? The only suggestion in this direction comes fromMortimer Tregennis himself, who says that his brother spoke aboutsome movement in the garden. That is certainly remarkable, as thenight was rainy, cloudy, and dark. Anyone who had the design to alarmthese people would be compelled to place his very face against theglass before he could be seen. There is a three-foot flower-borderoutside this window, but no indication of a footmark. It is difficultto imagine, then, how an outsider could have made so terrible animpression upon the company, nor have we found any possible motivefor so strange and elaborate an attempt. You perceive ourdifficulties, Watson?"
"They are only too clear," I answered with conviction.
"And yet, with a little more material, we may prove that they are notinsurmountable," said Holmes. "I fancy that among your extensivearchives, Watson, you may find some which were nearly as obscure.Meanwhile, we shall put the case aside until more accurate data areavailable, and devote the rest of our morning to the pursuit ofneolithic man."
I may have commented upon my friend's power of mental detachment, butnever have I wondered at it more than upon that spring morning inCornwall when for two hours he discoursed upon celts, arrowheads, andshards, as lightly as if no sinister mystery were waiting for hissolution. It was not until we had returned in the afternoon to ourcottage that we found a visitor awaiting us, who soon brought ourminds back to the matter in hand. Neither of us needed to be told whothat visitor was. The huge body, the craggy and deeply seamed facewith the fierce eyes and hawk-like nose, the grizzled hair whichnearly brushed our cottage ceiling, the beard--golden at the fringesand white near the lips, save for the nicotine stain from hisperpetual cigar--all these were as well known in London as in Africa,and could only be associated with the tremendous personality of Dr.Leon Sterndale, the great lion-hunter and explorer.
We had heard of his presence in the district and had once or twicecaught sight of his tall figure upon the moorland paths. He made noadvances to us, however, nor would we have dreamed of doing so tohim, as it was well known that it was his love of seclusion whichcaused him to spend the greater part of the intervals between hisjourneys in a small bungalow buried in the lonely wood of BeauchampArriance. Here, amid his books and his maps, he lived an absolutelylonely life, attending to his own simple wants and paying littleapparent heed to the affairs of his neighbours. It was a surprise tome, therefore, to hear him asking Holmes in an eager voice whether hehad made any advance in his reconstruction of this mysteriousepisode. "The county police are utterly at fault," said he, "butperhaps your wider experience has suggested some conceivableexplanation. My only claim to being taken into your confidence isthat during my many residences here I have come to know this familyof Tregennis very well--indeed, upon my Cornish mother's side I couldcall them cousins--and their strange fate has naturally been a greatshock to me. I may tell you that I had got as far as Plymouth upon myway to Africa, but the news reached me this morning, and I camestraight back again to help in the inquiry."
Holmes raised his eyebrows.
"Did you lose your boat through it?"
"I will take the next."
"Dear me! that is friendship indeed."
"I tell you they were relatives."
"Quite so--cousins of your mother. Was your baggage aboard the ship?"
"Some of it, but the main part at the hotel."
"I see. But surely this event could not have found its way into thePlymouth morning papers."
"No, sir; I had a telegram."
"Might I ask from whom?"
A shadow passed over the gaunt face of the explorer.
"You are very inquisitive, Mr. Holmes."
"It is my business."
With an effort Dr. Sterndale recovered his ruffled composure.
"I have no objection to telling you," he said. "It was Mr. Roundhay,the vicar, who sent me the telegram which recalled me."
"Thank you," said Holmes. "I may say in answer to your originalquestion that I have not cleared my mind entirely on the subject ofthis case, but that I have every hope of reaching some conclusion. Itwould be premature to say more."
"Perhaps you would not mind telling me if your suspicions point inany particular direction?"
"No, I can hardly answer that."
"Then I have wasted my time and need not prolong my visit." Thefamous doctor strode out of our cottage in considerable ill-humour,and within five minutes Holmes had followed him. I saw him no moreuntil the evening, when he returned with a slow step and haggard facewhich assured me that he had made no great progress with hisinvestigation. He glanced at a telegram which awaited him and threwit into the grate.
"From the Plymouth hotel, Watson," he said. "I learned the name of itfrom the vicar, and I wired to make certain that Dr. Leon Sterndale'saccount was true. It appears that he did indeed spend last nightthere, and that he has actually allowed some of his baggage to go onto Africa, while he returned to be present at this investigation.What do you make of that, Watson?"
"He is deeply interested."
"Deeply interested--yes. There is a thread here which we had not yetgrasped and which might lead us through the tangle. Cheer up, Watson,for I am very sure that our material has not yet all come to hand.When it does we may soon leave our difficulties behind us."
Little did I think how soon the words of Holmes would be realized, orhow strange and sinister would be that new development which openedup an entirely fresh line of investigation. I was shaving at mywindow in the morning when I heard the rattle of hoofs and, lookingup, saw a dog-cart coming at a gallop down the road. It pulled up atour door, and our friend, the vicar, sprang from it and rushed up ourgarden path. Holmes was already dressed, and we hastened down to meethim.
Our visitor was so excited that he could hardly articulate, but atlast in gasps and bursts his tragic story came out of him.
"We are devil-ridden, Mr. Holmes! My poor parish is devil-ridden!" hecried. "Satan himself is loose in it! We are given over into hishands!" He danced about in his agitation, a ludicrous object if itwere not for his ashy face and startled eyes. Finally he shot out histerrible news.
"Mr. Mortimer Tregennis died during the night, and with exactly thesame symptoms as the rest of his family."
Holmes sprang to his feet, all energy in an instant.
"Can you fit us both into your dog-cart?"
"Yes, I can."
"Then, Watson, we will postpone our breakfast. Mr. Roundhay, we areentirely at your disposal. Hurry--hurry, before things getdisarranged."
The lodger occupied two rooms at the vicarage, which were in an angleby themselves, the one above the other. Below was a largesitting-room; above, his bedroom. They looked out upon a croquet lawnwhich came up to the windows. We had arrived before the doctor or thepolice, so that everything was absolutely undisturbed. Let medescribe exactly the scene as we saw it upon that misty Marchmorning. It has left an impression which can never be effaced from mymind.
The atmosphere of the room was of a horrible and depressingstuffiness. The servant who had first entered had thrown up thewindow, or it would have been even more intolerable. This mightpartly be due to the fact that a lamp stood flaring and smoking onthe centre table. Beside it sat the dead man, leaning back in hischair, his thin beard projecting, his spectacles pushed up on to hisforehead, and his lean dark face turned towards the window andtwisted into the same distortion of terror which had marked thefeatures of his dead sister. His limbs were convulsed and his fingerscontorted as though he had died in a very paroxysm of fear. He wasfully clothed, though there were signs that his dressing had beendone in a hurry. We had already learned that his bed had been sleptin, and that the tragic end had come to him in the early morning.
One realized the red-hot energy which underlay Holmes's phlegmaticexterior when one saw the sudden change which came over him from themoment that he entered the fatal apartment. In an instant he wastense and alert, his eyes shining, his face set, his limbs quiveringwith eager activity. He was out on the lawn, in through the window,round the room, and up into the bedroom, for all the world like adashing foxhound drawing a cover. In the bedroom he made a rapid castaround and ended by throwing open the window, which appeared to givehim some fresh cause for excitement, for he leaned out of it withloud ejaculations of interest and delight. Then he rushed down thestair, out through the open window, threw himself upon his face onthe lawn, sprang up and into the room once more, all with the energyof the hunter who is at the very heels of his quarry. The lamp, whichwas an ordinary standard, he examined with minute care, makingcertain measurements upon its bowl. He carefully scrutinized with hislens the talc shield which covered the top of the chimney and scrapedoff some ashes which adhered to its upper surface, putting some ofthem into an envelope, which he placed in his pocketbook. Finally,just as the doctor and the official police put in an appearance, hebeckoned to the vicar and we all three went out upon the lawn.
"I am glad to say that my investigation has not been entirelybarren," he remarked. "I cannot remain to discuss the matter with thepolice, but I should be exceedingly obliged, Mr. Roundhay, if youwould give the inspector my compliments and direct his attention tothe bedroom window and to the sitting-room lamp. Each is suggestive,and together they are almost conclusive. If the police would desirefurther information I shall be happy to see any of them at thecottage. And now, Watson, I think that, perhaps, we shall be betteremployed elsewhere."
It may be that the police resented the intrusion of an amateur, orthat they imagined themselves to be upon some hopeful line ofinvestigation; but it is certain that we heard nothing from them forthe next two days. During this time Holmes spent some of his timesmoking and dreaming in the cottage; but a greater portion in countrywalks which he undertook alone, returning after many hours withoutremark as to where he had been. One experiment served to show me theline of his investigation. He had bought a lamp which was theduplicate of the one which had burned in the room of MortimerTregennis on the morning of the tragedy. This he filled with the sameoil as that used at the vicarage, and he carefully timed the periodwhich it would take to be exhausted. Another experiment which he madewas of a more unpleasant nature, and one which I am not likely everto forget.
"You will remember, Watson," he remarked one afternoon, "that thereis a single common point of resemblance in the varying reports whichhave reached us. This concerns the effect of the atmosphere of theroom in each case upon those who had first entered it. You willrecollect that Mortimer Tregennis, in describing the episode of hislast visit to his brother's house, remarked that the doctor onentering the room fell into a chair? You had forgotten? Well I cananswer for it that it was so. Now, you will remember also that Mrs.Porter, the housekeeper, told us that she herself fainted uponentering the room and had afterwards opened the window. In the secondcase--that of Mortimer Tregennis himself--you cannot have forgottenthe horrible stuffiness of the room when we arrived, though theservant had thrown open the window. That servant, I found uponinquiry, was so ill that she had gone to her bed. You will admit,Watson, that these facts are very suggestive. In each case there isevidence of a poisonous atmosphere. In each case, also, there iscombustion going on in the room--in the one case a fire, in the othera lamp. The fire was needed, but the lamp was lit--as a comparison ofthe oil consumed will show--long after it was broad daylight. Why?Surely because there is some connection between three things--theburning, the stuffy atmosphere, and, finally, the madness or death ofthose unfortunate people. That is clear, is it not?"
"It would appear so."
"At least we may accept it as a working hypothesis. We will suppose,then, that something was burned in each case which produced anatmosphere causing strange toxic effects. Very good. In the firstinstance--that of the Tregennis family--this substance was placed inthe fire. Now the window was shut, but the fire would naturally carryfumes to some extent up the chimney. Hence one would expect theeffects of the poison to be less than in the second case, where therewas less escape for the vapour. The result seems to indicate that itwas so, since in the first case only the woman, who had presumablythe more sensitive organism, was killed, the others exhibiting thattemporary or permanent lunacy which is evidently the first effect ofthe drug. In the second case the result was complete. The facts,therefore, seem to bear out the theory of a poison which worked bycombustion.
"With this train of reasoning in my head I naturally looked about inMortimer Tregennis's room to find some remains of this substance. Theobvious place to look was the talc shelf or smoke-guard of the lamp.There, sure enough, I perceived a number of flaky ashes, and roundthe edges a fringe of brownish powder, which had not yet beenconsumed. Half of this I took, as you saw, and I placed it in anenvelope."
"Why half, Holmes?"
"It is not for me, my dear Watson, to stand in the way of theofficial police force. I leave them all the evidence which I found.The poison still remained upon the talc had they the wit to find it.Now, Watson, we will light our lamp; we will, however, take theprecaution to open our window to avoid the premature decease of twodeserving members of society, and you will seat yourself near thatopen window in an armchair unless, like a sensible man, you determineto have nothing to do with the affair. Oh, you will see it out, willyou? I thought I knew my Watson. This chair I will place oppositeyours, so that we may be the same distance from the poison and faceto face. The door we will leave ajar. Each is now in a position towatch the other and to bring the experiment to an end should thesymptoms seem alarming. Is that all clear? Well, then, I take ourpowder--or what remains of it--from the envelope, and I lay it abovethe burning lamp. So! Now, Watson, let us sit down and awaitdevelopments."
They were not long in coming. I had hardly settled in my chair beforeI was conscious of a thick, musky odour, subtle and nauseous. At thevery first whiff of it my brain and my imagination were beyond allcontrol. A thick, black cloud swirled before my eyes, and my mindtold me that in this cloud, unseen as yet, but about to spring outupon my appalled senses, lurked all that was vaguely horrible, allthat was monstrous and inconceivably wicked in the universe. Vagueshapes swirled and swam amid the dark cloud-bank, each a menace and awarning of something coming, the advent of some unspeakable dwellerupon the threshold, whose very shadow would blast my soul. A freezinghorror took possession of me. I felt that my hair was rising, that myeyes were protruding, that my mouth was opened, and my tongue likeleather. The turmoil within my brain was such that something mustsurely snap. I tried to scream and was vaguely aware of some hoarsecroak which was my own voice, but distant and detached from myself.At the same moment, in some effort of escape, I broke through thatcloud of despair and had a glimpse of Holmes's face, white, rigid,and drawn with horror--the very look which I had seen upon thefeatures of the dead. It was that vision which gave me an instant ofsanity and of strength. I dashed from my chair, threw my arms roundHolmes, and together we lurched through the door, and an instantafterwards had thrown ourselves down upon the grass plot and werelying side by side, conscious only of the glorious sunshine which wasbursting its way through the hellish cloud of terror which had girtus in. Slowly it rose from our souls like the mists from a landscapeuntil peace and reason had returned, and we were sitting upon thegrass, wiping our clammy foreheads, and looking with apprehension ateach other to mark the last traces of that terrific experience whichwe had undergone.
"Upon my word, Watson!" said Holmes at last with an unsteady voice,"I owe you both my thanks and an apology. It was an unjustifiableexperiment even for one's self, and doubly so for a friend. I amreally very sorry."
"You know," I answered with some emotion, for I have never seen somuch of Holmes's heart before, "that it is my greatest joy andprivilege to help you."
He relapsed at once into the half-humorous, half-cynical vein whichwas his habitual attitude to those about him. "It would besuperfluous to drive us mad, my dear Watson," said he. "A candidobserver would certainly declare that we were so already before weembarked upon so wild an experiment. I confess that I never imaginedthat the effect could be so sudden and so severe." He dashed into thecottage, and, reappearing with the burning lamp held at full arm'slength, he threw it among a bank of brambles. "We must give the rooma little time to clear. I take it, Watson, that you have no longer ashadow of a doubt as to how these tragedies were produced?"
"None whatever."
"But the cause remains as obscure as before. Come into the arbourhere and let us discuss it together. That villainous stuff seemsstill to linger round my throat. I think we must admit that all theevidence points to this man, Mortimer Tregennis, having been thecriminal in the first tragedy, though he was the victim in the secondone. We must remember, in the first place, that there is some storyof a family quarrel, followed by a reconciliation. How bitter thatquarrel may have been, or how hollow the reconciliation we cannottell. When I think of Mortimer Tregennis, with the foxy face and thesmall shrewd, beady eyes behind the spectacles, he is not a man whomI should judge to be of a particularly forgiving disposition. Well,in the next place, you will remember that this idea of someone movingin the garden, which took our attention for a moment from the realcause of the tragedy, emanated from him. He had a motive inmisleading us. Finally, if he did not throw the substance into thefire at the moment of leaving the room, who did do so? The affairhappened immediately after his departure. Had anyone else come in,the family would certainly have risen from the table. Besides, inpeaceful Cornwall, visitors did not arrive after ten o'clock atnight. We may take it, then, that all the evidence points to MortimerTregennis as the culprit."
"Then his own death was suicide!"
"Well, Watson, it is on the face of it a not impossible supposition.The man who had the guilt upon his soul of having brought such a fateupon his own family might well be driven by remorse to inflict itupon himself. There are, however, some cogent reasons against it.Fortunately, there is one man in England who knows all about it, andI have made arrangements by which we shall hear the facts thisafternoon from his own lips. Ah! he is a little before his time.Perhaps you would kindly step this way, Dr. Leon Sterndale. We havebeen conducing a chemical experiment indoors which has left ourlittle room hardly fit for the reception of so distinguished avisitor."
I had heard the click of the garden gate, and now the majestic figureof the great African explorer appeared upon the path. He turned insome surprise towards the rustic arbour in which we sat.
"You sent for me, Mr. Holmes. I had your note about an hour ago, andI have come, though I really do not know why I should obey yoursummons."
"Perhaps we can clear the point up before we separate," said Holmes."Meanwhile, I am much obliged to you for your courteous acquiescence.You will excuse this informal reception in the open air, but myfriend Watson and I have nearly furnished an additional chapter towhat the papers call the Cornish Horror, and we prefer a clearatmosphere for the present. Perhaps, since the matters which we haveto discuss will affect you personally in a very intimate fashion, itis as well that we should talk where there can be no eavesdropping."
The explorer took his cigar from his lips and gazed sternly at mycompanion.
"I am at a loss to know, sir," he said, "what you can have to speakabout which affects me personally in a very intimate fashion."
"The killing of Mortimer Tregennis," said Holmes.
For a moment I wished that I were armed. Sterndale's fierce faceturned to a dusky red, his eyes glared, and the knotted, passionateveins started out in his forehead, while he sprang forward withclenched hands towards my companion. Then he stopped, and with aviolent effort he resumed a cold, rigid calmness, which was, perhaps,more suggestive of danger than his hot-headed outburst.
"I have lived so long among savages and beyond the law," said he,"that I have got into the way of being a law to myself. You would dowell, Mr. Holmes, not to forget it, for I have no desire to do you aninjury."
"Nor have I any desire to do you an injury, Dr. Sterndale. Surely theclearest proof of it is that, knowing what I know, I have sent foryou and not for the police."
Sterndale sat down with a gasp, overawed for, perhaps, the first timein his adventurous life. There was a calm assurance of power inHolmes's manner which could not be withstood. Our visitor stammeredfor a moment, his great hands opening and shutting in his agitation.
"What do you mean?" he asked at last. "If this is bluff upon yourpart, Mr. Holmes, you have chosen a bad man for your experiment. Letus have no more beating about the bush. What do you mean?"
"I will tell you," said Holmes, "and the reason why I tell you isthat I hope frankness may beget frankness. What my next step may bewill depend entirely upon the nature of your own defence."
"My defence?"
"Yes, sir."
"My defence against what?"
"Against the charge of killing Mortimer Tregennis."
Sterndale mopped his forehead with his handkerchief. "Upon my word,you are getting on," said he. "Do all your successes depend upon thisprodigious power of bluff?"
"The bluff," said Holmes sternly, "is upon your side, Dr. LeonSterndale, and not upon mine. As a proof I will tell you some of thefacts upon which my conclusions are based. Of your return fromPlymouth, allowing much of your property to go on to Africa, I willsay nothing save that it first informed me that you were one of thefactors which had to be taken into account in reconstructing thisdrama--"
"I came back--"
"I have heard your reasons and regard them as unconvincing andinadequate. We will pass that. You came down here to ask me whom Isuspected. I refused to answer you. You then went to the vicarage,waited outside it for some time, and finally returned to yourcottage."
"How do you know that?"
"I followed you."
"I saw no one."
"That is what you may expect to see when I follow you. You spent arestless night at your cottage, and you formed certain plans, whichin the early morning you proceeded to put into execution. Leavingyour door just as day was breaking, you filled your pocket with somereddish gravel that was lying heaped beside your gate."
Sterndale gave a violent start and looked at Holmes in amazement.
"You then walked swiftly for the mile which separated you from thevicarage. You were wearing, I may remark, the same pair of ribbedtennis shoes which are at the present moment upon your feet. At thevicarage you passed through the orchard and the side hedge, comingout under the window of the lodger Tregennis. It was now daylight,but the household was not yet stirring. You drew some of the gravelfrom your pocket, and you threw it up at the window above you."
Sterndale sprang to his feet.
"I believe that you are the devil himself!" he cried.
Holmes smiled at the compliment. "It took two, or possibly three,handfuls before the lodger came to the window. You beckoned him tocome down. He dressed hurriedly and descended to his sitting-room.You entered by the window. There was an interview--a shortone--during which you walked up and down the room. Then you passedout and closed the window, standing on the lawn outside smoking acigar and watching what occurred. Finally, after the death ofTregennis, you withdrew as you had come. Now, Dr. Sterndale, how doyou justify such conduct, and what were the motives for your actions?If you prevaricate or trifle with me, I give you my assurance thatthe matter will pass out of my hands forever."
Our visitor's face had turned ashen gray as he listened to the wordsof his accuser. Now he sat for some time in thought with his facesunk in his hands. Then with a sudden impulsive gesture he plucked aphotograph from his breast-pocket and threw it on the rustic tablebefore us.
"That is why I have done it," said he.
It showed the bust and face of a very beautiful woman. Holmes stoopedover it.
"Brenda Tregennis," said he.
"Yes, Brenda Tregennis," repeated our visitor. "For years I haveloved her. For years she has loved me. There is the secret of thatCornish seclusion which people have marvelled at. It has brought meclose to the one thing on earth that was dear to me. I could notmarry her, for I have a wife who has left me for years and yet whom,by the deplorable laws of England, I could not divorce. For yearsBrenda waited. For years I waited. And this is what we have waitedfor." A terrible sob shook his great frame, and he clutched histhroat under his brindled beard. Then with an effort he masteredhimself and spoke on:
"The vicar knew. He was in our confidence. He would tell you that shewas an angel upon earth. That was why he telegraphed to me and Ireturned. What was my baggage or Africa to me when I learned thatsuch a fate had come upon my darling? There you have the missing clueto my action, Mr. Holmes."
"Proceed," said my friend.
Dr. Sterndale drew from his pocket a paper packet and laid it uponthe table. On the outside was written "Radix pedis diaboli" with ared poison label beneath it. He pushed it towards me. "I understandthat you are a doctor, sir. Have you ever heard of this preparation?"
"Devil's-foot root! No, I have never heard of it."
"It is no reflection upon your professional knowledge," said he, "forI believe that, save for one sample in a laboratory at Buda, there isno other specimen in Europe. It has not yet found its way either intothe pharmacopoeia or into the literature of toxicology. The root isshaped like a foot, half human, half goatlike; hence the fancifulname given by a botanical missionary. It is used as an ordeal poisonby the medicine-men in certain districts of West Africa and is keptas a secret among them. This particular specimen I obtained undervery extraordinary circumstances in the Ubangi country." He openedthe paper as he spoke and disclosed a heap of reddish-brown,snuff-like powder.
"Well, sir?" asked Holmes sternly.
"I am about to tell you, Mr. Holmes, all that actually occurred, foryou already know so much that it is clearly to my interest that youshould know all. I have already explained the relationship in which Istood to the Tregennis family. For the sake of the sister I wasfriendly with the brothers. There was a family quarrel about moneywhich estranged this man Mortimer, but it was supposed to be made up,and I afterwards met him as I did the others. He was a sly, subtle,scheming man, and several things arose which gave me a suspicion ofhim, but I had no cause for any positive quarrel.
"One day, only a couple of weeks ago, he came down to my cottage andI showed him some of my African curiosities. Among other things Iexhibited this powder, and I told him of its strange properties, howit stimulates those brain centres which control the emotion of fear,and how either madness or death is the fate of the unhappy native whois subjected to the ordeal by the priest of his tribe. I told himalso how powerless European science would be to detect it. How hetook it I cannot say, for I never left the room, but there is nodoubt that it was then, while I was opening cabinets and stooping toboxes, that he managed to abstract some of the devil's-foot root. Iwell remember how he plied me with questions as to the amount and thetime that was needed for its effect, but I little dreamed that hecould have a personal reason for asking.
"I thought no more of the matter until the vicar's telegram reachedme at Plymouth. This villain had thought that I would be at seabefore the news could reach me, and that I should be lost for yearsin Africa. But I returned at once. Of course, I could not listen tothe details without feeling assured that my poison had been used. Icame round to see you on the chance that some other explanation hadsuggested itself to you. But there could be none. I was convincedthat Mortimer Tregennis was the murderer; that for the sake of money,and with the idea, perhaps, that if the other members of his familywere all insane he would be the sole guardian of their jointproperty, he had used the devil's-foot powder upon them, driven twoof them out of their senses, and killed his sister Brenda, the onehuman being whom I have ever loved or who has ever loved me. Therewas his crime; what was to be his punishment?
"Should I appeal to the law? Where were my proofs? I knew that thefacts were true, but could I help to make a jury of countrymenbelieve so fantastic a story? I might or I might not. But I could notafford to fail. My soul cried out for revenge. I have said to youonce before, Mr. Holmes, that I have spent much of my life outsidethe law, and that I have come at last to be a law to myself. So itwas even now. I determined that the fate which he had given to othersshould be shared by himself. Either that or I would do justice uponhim with my own hand. In all England there can be no man who setsless value upon his own life than I do at the present moment.
"Now I have told you all. You have yourself supplied the rest. I did,as you say, after a restless night, set off early from my cottage. Iforesaw the difficulty of arousing him, so I gathered some gravelfrom the pile which you have mentioned, and I used it to throw up tohis window. He came down and admitted me through the window of thesitting-room. I laid his offence before him. I told him that I hadcome both as judge and executioner. The wretch sank into a chair,paralyzed at the sight of my revolver. I lit the lamp, put the powderabove it, and stood outside the window, ready to carry out my threatto shoot him should he try to leave the room. In five minutes hedied. My God! how he died! But my heart was flint, for he endurednothing which my innocent darling had not felt before him. There ismy story, Mr. Holmes. Perhaps, if you loved a woman, you would havedone as much yourself. At any rate, I am in your hands. You can takewhat steps you like. As I have already said, there is no man livingwho can fear death less than I do."
Holmes sat for some little time in silence.
"What were your plans?" he asked at last.
"I had intended to bury myself in central Africa. My work there isbut half finished."
"Go and do the other half," said Holmes. "I, at least, am notprepared to prevent you."
Dr. Sterndale raised his giant figure, bowed gravely, and walked fromthe arbour. Holmes lit his pipe and handed me his pouch.
"Some fumes which are not poisonous would be a welcome change," saidhe. "I think you must agree, Watson, that it is not a case in whichwe are called upon to interfere. Our investigation has beenindependent, and our action shall be so also. You would not denouncethe man?"
"Certainly not," I answered.
"I have never loved, Watson, but if I did and if the woman I lovedhad met such an end, I might act even as our lawless lion-hunter hasdone. Who knows? Well, Watson, I will not offend your intelligence byexplaining what is obvious. The gravel upon the window-sill was, ofcourse, the starting-point of my research. It was unlike anything inthe vicarage garden. Only when my attention had been drawn to Dr.Sterndale and his cottage did I find its counterpart. The lampshining in broad daylight and the remains of powder upon the shieldwere successive links in a fairly obvious chain. And now, my dearWatson, I think we may dismiss the matter from our mind and go backwith a clear conscience to the study of those Chaldean roots whichare surely to be traced in the Cornish branch of the great Celticspeech."





                             HIS LAST BOW                    An Epilogue of Sherlock Holmes
It was nine o'clock at night upon the second of August--the mostterrible August in the history of the world. One might have thoughtalready that God's curse hung heavy over a degenerate world, forthere was an awesome hush and a feeling of vague expectancy in thesultry and stagnant air. The sun had long set, but one blood-red gashlike an open wound lay low in the distant west. Above, the stars wereshining brightly, and below, the lights of the shipping glimmered inthe bay. The two famous Germans stood beside the stone parapet of thegarden walk, with the long, low, heavily gabled house behind them,and they looked down upon the broad sweep of the beach at the foot ofthe great chalk cliff in which Von Bork, like some wandering eagle,had perched himself four years before. They stood with their headsclose together, talking in low, confidential tones. From below thetwo glowing ends of their cigars might have been the smouldering eyesof some malignant fiend looking down in the darkness.
A remarkable man this Von Bork--a man who could hardly be matchedamong all the devoted agents of the Kaiser. It was his talents whichhad first recommended him for the English mission, the most importantmission of all, but since he had taken it over those talents hadbecome more and more manifest to the half-dozen people in the worldwho were really in touch with the truth. One of these was his presentcompanion, Baron Von Herling, the chief secretary of the legation,whose huge 100-horse-power Benz car was blocking the country lane asit waited to waft its owner back to London.
"So far as I can judge the trend of events, you will probably be backin Berlin within the week," the secretary was saying. "When you getthere, my dear Von Bork, I think you will be surprised at the welcomeyou will receive. I happen to know what is thought in the highestquarters of your work in this country." He was a huge man, thesecretary, deep, broad, and tall, with a slow, heavy fashion ofspeech which had been his main asset in his political career.
Von Bork laughed.
"They are not very hard to deceive," he remarked. "A more docile,simple folk could not be imagined."
"I don't know about that," said the other thoughtfully. "They havestrange limits and one must learn to observe them. It is that surfacesimplicity of theirs which makes a trap for the stranger. One's firstimpression is that they are entirely soft. Then one comes suddenlyupon something very hard, and you know that you have reached thelimit and must adapt yourself to the fact. They have, for example,their insular conventions which simply must be observed."
"Meaning 'good form' and that sort of thing?" Von Bork sighed as onewho had suffered much.
"Meaning British prejudice in all its queer manifestations. As anexample I may quote one of my own worst blunders--I can afford totalk of my blunders, for you know my work well enough to be aware ofmy successes. It was on my first arrival. I was invited to a week-endgathering at the country house of a cabinet minister. Theconversation was amazingly indiscreet."
Von Bork nodded. "I've been there," said he dryly.
"Exactly. Well, I naturally sent a resume of the information toBerlin. Unfortunately our good chancellor is a little heavy-handed inthese matters, and he transmitted a remark which showed that he wasaware of what had been said. This, of course, took the trail straightup to me. You've no idea the harm that it did me. There was nothingsoft about our British hosts on that occasion, I can assure you. Iwas two years living it down. Now you, with this sporting pose ofyours--"
"No, no, don't call it a pose. A pose is an artificial thing. This isquite natural. I am a born sportsman. I enjoy it."
"Well, that makes it the more effective. You yacht against them, youhunt with them, you play polo, you match them in every game, yourfour-in-hand takes the prize at Olympia. I have even heard that yougo the length of boxing with the young officers. What is the result?Nobody takes you seriously. You are a 'good old sport,' 'quite adecent fellow for a German,' a hard-drinking, night-club,knock-about-town, devil-may-care young fellow. And all the time thisquiet country house of yours is the centre of half the mischief inEngland, and the sporting squire the most astute secret-service manin Europe. Genius, my dear Von Bork--genius!"
"You flatter me, Baron. But certainly I may claim my four years inthis country have not been unproductive. I've never shown you mylittle store. Would you mind stepping in for a moment?"
The door of the study opened straight on to the terrace. Von Borkpushed it back, and, leading the way, he clicked the switch of theelectric light. He then closed the door behind the bulky form whichfollowed him and carefully adjusted the heavy curtain over thelatticed window. Only when all these precautions had been taken andtested did he turn his sunburned aquiline face to his guest.
"Some of my papers have gone," said he. "When my wife and thehousehold left yesterday for Flushing they took the less importantwith them. I must, of course, claim the protection of the embassy forthe others."
"Your name has already been filed as one of the personal suite. Therewill be no difficulties for you or your baggage. Of course, it isjust possible that we may not have to go. England may leave France toher fate. We are sure that there is no binding treaty between them."
"And Belgium?"
"Yes, and Belgium, too."
Von Bork shook his head. "I don't see how that could be. There is adefinite treaty there. She could never recover from such ahumiliation."
"She would at least have peace for the moment."
"But her honor?"
"Tut, my dear sir, we live in a utilitarian age. Honour is amediaeval conception. Besides England is not ready. It is aninconceivable thing, but even our special war tax of fifty million,which one would think made our purpose as clear as if we hadadvertised it on the front page of the Times, has not roused thesepeople from their slumbers. Here and there one hears a question. Itis my business to find an answer. Here and there also there is anirritation. It is my business to soothe it. But I can assure you thatso far as the essentials go--the storage of munitions, thepreparation for submarine attack, the arrangements for making highexplosives--nothing is prepared. How, then, can England come in,especially when we have stirred her up such a devil's brew of Irishcivil war, window-breaking Furies, and God knows what to keep herthoughts at home."
"She must think of her future."
"Ah, that is another matter. I fancy that in the future we have ourown very definite plans about England, and that your information willbe very vital to us. It is to-day or to-morrow with Mr. John Bull. Ifhe prefers to-day we are perfectly ready. If it is to-morrow we shallbe more ready still. I should think they would be wiser to fight withallies than without them, but that is their own affair. This week istheir week of destiny. But you were speaking of your papers." He satin the armchair with the light shining upon his broad bald head,while he puffed sedately at his cigar.
The large oak-panelled, book-lined room had a curtain hung in thefuture corner. When this was drawn it disclosed a large, brass-boundsafe. Von Bork detached a small key from his watch chain, and aftersome considerable manipulation of the lock he swung open the heavydoor.
"Look!" said he, standing clear, with a wave of his hand.
The light shone vividly into the opened safe, and the secretary ofthe embassy gazed with an absorbed interest at the rows of stuffedpigeon-holes with which it was furnished. Each pigeon-hole had itslabel, and his eyes as he glanced along them read a long series ofsuch titles as "Fords," "Harbour-defences," "Aeroplanes," "Ireland,""Egypt," "Portsmouth forts," "The Channel," "Rosythe," and a score ofothers. Each compartment was bristling with papers and plans.
"Colossal!" said the secretary. Putting down his cigar he softlyclapped his fat hands.
"And all in four years, Baron. Not such a bad show for thehard-drinking, hard-riding country squire. But the gem of mycollection is coming and there is the setting all ready for it." Hepointed to a space over which "Naval Signals" was printed.
"But you have a good dossier there already."
"Out of date and waste paper. The Admiralty in some way got the alarmand every code has been changed. It was a blow, Baron--the worstsetback in my whole campaign. But thanks to my check-book and thegood Altamont all will be well to-night."
The Baron looked at his watch and gave a guttural exclamation ofdisappointment.
"Well, I really can wait no longer. You can imagine that things aremoving at present in Carlton Terrace and that we have all to be atour posts. I had hoped to be able to bring news of your great coup.Did Altamont name no hour?"
Von Bork pushed over a telegram.
Will come without fail to-night and bring new sparking plugs.--Altamont.
"Sparking plugs, eh?"
"You see he poses as a motor expert and I keep a full garage. In ourcode everything likely to come up is named after some spare part. Ifhe talks of a radiator it is a battleship, of an oil pump a cruiser,and so on. Sparking plugs are naval signals."
"From Portsmouth at midday," said the secretary, examining thesuperscription. "By the way, what do you give him?"
"Five hundred pounds for this particular job. Of course he has asalary as well."
"The greedy rouge. They are useful, these traitors, but I grudge themtheir blood money."
"I grudge Altamont nothing. He is a wonderful worker. If I pay himwell, at least he delivers the goods, to use his own phrase. Besideshe is not a traitor. I assure you that our most pan-Germanic Junkeris a sucking dove in his feelings towards England as compared with areal bitter Irish-American."
"Oh, an Irish-American?"
"If you heard him talk you would not doubt it. Sometimes I assure youI can hardly understand him. He seems to have declared war on theKing's English as well as on the English king. Must you really go? Hemay be here any moment."
"No. I'm sorry, but I have already overstayed my time. We shallexpect you early to-morrow, and when you get that signal book throughthe little door on the Duke of York's steps you can put a triumphantfinis to your record in England. What! Tokay!" He indicated a heavilysealed dust-covered bottle which stood with two high glasses upon asalver.
"May I offer you a glass before your journey?"
"No, thanks. But it looks like revelry."
"Altamont has a nice taste in wines, and he took a fancy to my Tokay.He is a touchy fellow and needs humouring in small things. I have tostudy him, I assure you." They had strolled out on to the terraceagain, and along it to the further end where at a touch from theBaron's chauffeur the great car shivered and chuckled. "Those are thelights of Harwich, I suppose," said the secretary, pulling on hisdust coat. "How still and peaceful it all seems. There may be otherlights within the week, and the English coast a less tranquil place!The heavens, too, may not be quite so peaceful if all that the goodZeppelin promises us comes true. By the way, who is that?"
Only one window showed a light behind them; in it there stood a lamp,and beside it, seated at a table, was a dear old ruddy-faced woman ina country cap. She was bending over her knitting and stoppingoccasionally to stroke a large black cat upon a stool beside her.
"That is Martha, the only servant I have left."
The secretary chuckled.
"She might almost personify Britannia," said he, "with her completeself-absorption and general air of comfortable somnolence. Well, aurevoir, Von Bork!" With a final wave of his hand he sprang into thecar, and a moment later the two golden cones from the headlights shotthrough the darkness. The secretary lay back in the cushions of theluxurious limousine, with his thoughts so full of the impendingEuropean tragedy that he hardly observed that as his car swung roundthe village street it nearly passed over a little Ford coming in theopposite direction.
Von Bork walked slowly back to the study when the last gleams of themotor lamps had faded into the distance. As he passed he observedthat his old housekeeper had put out her lamp and retired. It was anew experience to him, the silence and darkness of his widespreadhouse, for his family and household had been a large one. It was arelief to him, however, to think that they were all in safety andthat, but for that one old woman who had lingered in the kitchen, hehad the whole place to himself. There was a good deal of tidying upto do inside his study and he set himself to do it until his keen,handsome face was flushed with the heat of the burning papers. Aleather valise stood beside his table, and into this he began to packvery neatly and systematically the precious contents of his safe. Hehad hardly got started with the work, however, when his quick earscaught the sounds of a distant car. Instantly he gave an exclamationof satisfaction, strapped up the valise, shut the safe, locked it,and hurried out on to the terrace. He was just in time to see thelights of a small car come to a halt at the gate. A passenger sprangout of it and advanced swiftly towards him, while the chauffeur, aheavily built, elderly man with a gray moustache, settled down likeone who resigns himself to a long vigil.
"Well?" asked Von Bork eagerly, running forward to meet his visitor.
For answer the man waved a small brown-paper parcel triumphantlyabove his head.
"You can give me the glad hand to-night, mister," he cried. "I'mbringing home the bacon at last."
"The signals?"
"Same as I said in my cable. Every last one of them, semaphore, lampcode, Marconi--a copy, mind you, not the original. That was toodangerous. But it's the real goods, and you can lay to that." Heslapped the German upon the shoulder with a rough familiarity fromwhich the other winced.
"Come in," he said. "I'm all alone in the house. I was only waitingfor this. Of course a copy is better than the original. If anoriginal were missing they would change the whole thing. You thinkit's all safe about the copy?"
The Irish-American had entered the study and stretched his long limbsfrom the armchair. He was a tall, gaunt man of sixty, with clear-cutfeatures and a small goatee beard which gave him a generalresemblance to the caricatures of Uncle Sam. A half-smoked, soddencigar hung from the corner of his mouth, and as he sat down he strucka match and relit it. "Making ready for a move?" he remarked as helooked round him. "Say, mister," he added, as his eyes fell upon thesafe from which the curtain was now removed, "you don't tell me youkeep your papers in that?"
"Why not?"
"Gosh, in a wide-open contraption like that! And they reckon you tobe some spy. Why, a Yankee crook would be into that with acan-opener. If I'd known that any letter of mine was goin' to lieloose in a thing like that I'd have been a mug to write to you atall."
"It would puzzle any crook to force that safe," Von Bork answered."You won't cut that metal with any tool."
"But the lock?"
"No, it's a double combination lock. You know what that is?"
"Search me," said the American.
"Well, you need a word as well as a set of figures before you can getthe lock to work." He rose and showed a double-radiating disc roundthe keyhole. "This outer one is for the letters, the inner one forthe figures."
"Well, well, that's fine."
"So it's not quite as simple as you thought. It was four years agothat I had it made, and what do you think I chose for the word andfigures?"
"It's beyond me."
"Well, I chose August for the word, and 1914 for the figures, andhere we are."
The American's face showed his surprise and admiration.
"My, but that was smart! You had it down to a fine thing."
"Yes, a few of us even then could have guessed the date. Here it is,and I'm shutting down to-morrow morning."
"Well, I guess you'll have to fix me up also. I'm not staying is thisgol-darned country all on my lonesome. In a week or less, from what Isee, John Bull will be on his hind legs and fair ramping. I'd ratherwatch him from over the water."
"But you're an American citizen?"
"Well, so was Jack James an American citizen, but he's doing time inPortland all the same. It cuts no ice with a British copper to tellhim you're an American citizen. 'It's British law and order overhere,' says he. By the way, mister, talking of Jack James, it seemsto me you don't do much to cover your men."
"What do you mean?" Von Bork asked sharply.
"Well, you are their employer, ain't you? It's up to you to see thatthey don't fall down. But they do fall down, and when did you everpick them up? There's James--"
"It was James's own fault. You know that yourself. He was tooself-willed for the job."
"James was a bonehead--I give you that. Then there was Hollis."
"The man was mad."
"Well, he went a bit woozy towards the end. It's enough to make a manbug-house when he has to play a part from morning to night with ahundred guys all ready to set the coppers wise to him. But now thereis Steiner--"
Von Bork started violently, and his ruddy face turned a shade paler.
"What about Steiner?"
"Well, they've got him, that's all. They raided his store last night,and he and his papers are all in Portsmouth jail. You'll go off andhe, poor devil, will have to stand the racket, and lucky if he getsoff with his life. That's why I want to get over the water as soon asyou do."
Von Bork was a strong, self-contained man, but it was easy to seethat the news had shaken him.
"How could they have got on to Steiner?" he muttered. "That's theworst blow yet."
"Well, you nearly had a worse one, for I believe they are not far offme."
"You don't mean that!"
"Sure thing. My landlady down Fratton way had some inquiries, andwhen I heard of it I guessed it was time for me to hustle. But what Iwant to know, mister, is how the coppers know these things? Steineris the fifth man you've lost since I signed on with you, and I knowthe name of the sixth if I don't get a move on. How do you explainit, and ain't you ashamed to see your men go down like this?"
Von Bork flushed crimson.
"How dare you speak in such a way!"
"If I didn't dare things, mister, I wouldn't be in your service. ButI'll tell you straight what is in my mind. I've heard that with youGerman politicians when an agent has done his work you are not sorryto see him put away."
Von Bork sprang to his feet.
"Do you dare to suggest that I have given away my own agents!"
"I don't stand for that, mister, but there's a stool pigeon or across somewhere, and it's up to you to find out where it is. Anyhow Iam taking no more chances. It's me for little Holland, and the soonerthe better."
Von Bork had mastered his anger.
"We have been allies too long to quarrel now at the very hour ofvictory," he said. "You've done splendid work and taken risks, and Ican't forget it. By all means go to Holland, and you can get a boatfrom Rotterdam to New York. No other line will be safe a week fromnow. I'll take that book and pack it with the rest."
The American held the small parcel in his hand, but made no motion togive it up.
"What about the dough?" he asked.
"The what?"
"The boodle. The reward. The 500. The gunner turned damned nasty atthe last, and I had to square him with an extra hundred dollars or itwould have been nitsky for you and me. 'Nothin' doin'!' says he, andhe meant it, too, but the last hundred did it. It's cost me twohundred pound from first to last, so it isn't likely I'd give it upwithout gettin' my wad."
Von Bork smiled with some bitterness. "You don't seem to have a veryhigh opinion of my honour," said he, "you want the money before yougive up the book."
"Well, mister, it is a business proposition."
"All right. Have your way." He sat down at the table and scribbled acheck, which he tore from the book, but he refrained from handing itto his companion. "After all, since we are to be on such terms, Mr.Altamont," said he, "I don't see why I should trust you any more thanyou trust me. Do you understand?" he added, looking back over hisshoulder at the American. "There's the check upon the table. I claimthe right to examine that parcel before you pick the money up."
The American passed it over without a word. Von Bork undid a windingof string and two wrappers of paper. Then he sat dazing for a momentin silent amazement at a small blue book which lay before him. Acrossthe cover was printed in golden letters Practical Handbook of BeeCulture. Only for one instant did the master spy glare at thisstrangely irrelevant inscription. The next he was gripped at the backof his neck by a grasp of iron, and a chloroformed sponge was held infront of his writhing face.
"Another glass, Watson!" said Mr. Sherlock Holmes as he extended thebottle of Imperial Tokay.
The thickset chauffeur, who had seated himself by the table, pushedforward his glass with some eagerness.
"It is a good wine, Holmes."
"A remarkable wine, Watson. Our friend upon the sofa has assured methat it is from Franz Josef's special cellar at the SchoenbrunnPalace. Might I trouble you to open the window, for chloroform vapourdoes not help the palate."
The safe was ajar, and Holmes standing in front of it was removingdossier after dossier, swiftly examining each, and then packing itneatly in Von Bork's valise. The German lay upon the sofa sleepingstertorously with a strap round his upper arms and another round hislegs.
"We need not hurry ourselves, Watson. We are safe from interruption.Would you mind touching the bell? There is no one in the house exceptold Martha, who has played her part to admiration. I got her thesituation here when first I took the matter up. Ah, Martha, you willbe glad to hear that all is well."
The pleasant old lady had appeared in the doorway. She curtseyed witha smile to Mr. Holmes, but glanced with some apprehension at thefigure upon the sofa.
"It is all right, Martha. He has not been hurt at all."
"I am glad of that, Mr. Holmes. According to his lights he has been akind master. He wanted me to go with his wife to Germany yesterday,but that would hardly have suited your plans, would it, sir?"
"No, indeed, Martha. So long as you were here I was easy in my mind.We waited some time for your signal to-night."
"It was the secretary, sir."
"I know. His car passed ours."
"I thought he would never go. I knew that it would not suit yourplans, sir, to find him here."
"No, indeed. Well, it only meant that we waited half an hour or sountil I saw your lamp go out and knew that the coast was clear. Youcan report to me to-morrow in London, Martha, at Claridge's Hotel."
"Very good, sir."
"I suppose you have everything ready to leave."
"Yes, sir. He posted seven letters to-day. I have the addresses asusual."
"Very good, Martha. I will look into them to-morrow. Good-night.These papers," he continued as the old lady vanished, "are not ofvery great importance, for, of course, the information which theyrepresent has been sent off long ago to the German government. Theseare the originals which cold not safely be got out of the country."
"Then they are of no use."
"I should not go so far as to say that, Watson. They will at leastshow our people what is known and what is not. I may say that a goodmany of these papers have come through me, and I need not add arethoroughly untrustworthy. It would brighten my declining years to seea German cruiser navigating the Solent according to the mine-fieldplans which I have furnished. But you, Watson"--he stopped his workand took his old friend by the shoulders--"I've hardly seen you inthe light yet. How have the years used you? You look the same blitheboy as ever."
"I feel twenty years younger, Holmes. I have seldom felt so happy aswhen I got your wire asking me to meet you at Harwich with the car.But you, Holmes--you have changed very little--save for that horriblegoatee."
"These are the sacrifices one makes for one's country, Watson," saidHolmes, pulling at his little tuft. "To-morrow it will be but adreadful memory. With my hair cut and a few other superficial changesI shall no doubt reappear at Claridge's to-morrow as I was beforethis American stunt--I beg your pardon, Watson, my well of Englishseems to be permanently defiled--before this American job came myway."
"But you have retired, Holmes. We heard of you as living the life ofa hermit among your bees and your books in a small farm upon theSouth Downs."
"Exactly, Watson. Here is the fruit of my leisured ease, the magnumopus of my latter years!" He picked up the volume from the table andread out the whole title, Practical Handbook of Bee Culture, withSome Observations upon the Segregation of the Queen. "Alone I did it.Behold the fruit of pensive nights and laborious days when I watchedthe little working gangs as once I watched the criminal world ofLondon."
"But how did you get to work again?"
"Ah, I have often marvelled at it myself. The Foreign Minister aloneI could have withstood, but when the Premier also deigned to visit myhumble roof--! The fact is, Watson, that this gentleman upon the sofawas a bit too good for our people. He was in a class by himself.Things were going wrong, and no one could understand why they weregoing wrong. Agents were suspected or even caught, but there wasevidence of some strong and secret central force. It was absolutelynecessary to expose it. Strong pressure was brought upon me to lookinto the matter. It has cost me two years, Watson, but they have notbeen devoid of excitement. When I say that I started my pilgrimage atChicago, graduated in an Irish secret society at Buffalo, gaveserious trouble to the constabulary at Skibbareen, and so eventuallycaught the eye of a subordinate agent of Von Bork, who recommended meas a likely man, you will realize that the matter was complex. Sincethen I have been honoured by his confidence, which has not preventedmost of his plans going subtly wrong and five of his best agentsbeing in prison. I watched them, Watson, and I picked them as theyripened. Well, sir, I hope that you are none the worse!"
The last remark was addressed to Von Bork himself, who after muchgasping and blinking had lain quietly listening to Holmes'sstatement. He broke out now into a furious stream of Germaninvective, his face convulsed with passion. Holmes continued hisswift investigation of documents while his prisoner cursed and swore.
"Though unmusical, German is the most expressive of all languages,"he observed when Von Bork had stopped from pure exhaustion. "Hullo!Hullo!" he added as he looked hard at the corner of a tracing beforeputting it in the box. "This should put another bird in the cage. Ihad no idea that the paymaster was such a rascal, though I have longhad an eye upon him. Mister Von Bork, you have a great deal to answerfor."
The prisoner had raised himself with some difficulty upon the sofaand was staring with a strange mixture of amazement and hatred at hiscaptor.
"I shall get level with you, Altamont," he said, speaking with slowdeliberation. "If it takes me all my life I shall get level withyou!"
"The old sweet song," said Holmes. "How often have I heard it in daysgone by. It was a favorite ditty of the late lamented ProfessorMoriarty.  Colonel Sebastian Moran has also been known to warble it.And yet I live and keep bees upon the South Downs."
"Curse you, you double traitor!" cried the German, straining againsthis bonds and glaring murder from his furious eyes.
"No, no, it is not so bad as that," said Holmes, smiling. "As myspeech surely shows you, Mr. Altamont of Chicago had no existence infact. I used him and he is gone."
"Then who are you?"
"It is really immaterial who I am, but since the matter seems tointerest you, Mr. Von Bork, I may say that this is not my firstacquaintance with the members of your family. I have done a good dealof business in Germany in the past and my name is probably familiarto you."
"I would wish to know it," said the Prussian grimly.
"It was I who brought about the separation between Irene Adler andthe late King of Bohemia when your cousin Heinrich was the ImperialEnvoy. It was I also who saved from murder, by the Nihilist Klopman,Count Von und Zu Grafenstein, who was your mother's elder brother. Itwas I--"
Von Bork sat up in amazement.
"There is only one man," he cried.
"Exactly," said Holmes.
Von Bork groaned and sank back on the sofa. "And most of thatinformation came through you," he cried. "What is it worth? What haveI done? It is my ruin forever!"
"It is certainly a little untrustworthy," said Holmes. "It willrequire some checking and you have little time to check it. Youradmiral may find the new guns rather larger than he expects, and thecruisers perhaps a trifle faster."
Von Bork clutched at his own throat in despair.
"There are a good many other points of detail which will, no doubt,come to light in good time. But you have one quality which is veryrare in a German, Mr. Von Bork: you are a sportsman and you will bearme no ill-will when you realize that you, who have outwitted so manyother people, have at last been outwitted yourself. After all, youhave done your best for your country, and I have done my best formine, and what could be more natural? Besides," he added, notunkindly, as he laid his hand upon the shoulder of the prostrate man,"it is better than to fall before some ignoble foe. These papers arenow ready, Watson. If you will help me with our prisoner, I thinkthat we may get started for London at once."
It was no easy task to move Von Bork, for he was a strong and adesperate man. Finally, holding either arm, the two friends walkedhim very slowly down the garden walk which he had trod with suchproud confidence when he received the congratulations of the famousdiplomatist only a few hours before. After a short, final struggle hewas hoisted, still bound hand and foot, into the spare seat of thelittle car. His precious valise was wedged in beside him.
"I trust that you are as comfortable as circumstances permit," saidHolmes when the final arrangements were made. "Should I be guilty ofa liberty if I lit a cigar and placed it between your lips?"
But all amenities were wasted upon the angry German.
"I suppose you realize, Mr. Sherlock Holmes," said he, "that if yourgovernment bears you out in this treatment it becomes an act of war."
"What about your government and all this treatment?" said Holmes,tapping the valise.
"You are a private individual. You have no warrant for my arrest. Thewhole proceeding is absolutely illegal and outrageous."
"Absolutely," said Holmes.
"Kidnapping a German subject."
"And stealing his private papers."
"Well, you realize your position, you and your accomplice here. If Iwere to shout for help as we pass through the village--"
"My dear sir, if you did anything so foolish you would probablyenlarge the two limited titles of our village inns by giving us 'TheDangling Prussian' as a signpost. The Englishman is a patientcreature, but at present his temper is a little inflamed, and itwould be as well not to try him too far. No, Mr. Von Bork, you willgo with us in a quiet, sensible fashion to Scotland Yard, whence youcan send for your friend, Baron Von Herling, and see if even now youmay not fill that place which he has reserved for you in theambassadorial suite. As to you, Watson, you are joining us with yourold service, as I understand, so London won't be out of your way.Stand with me here upon the terrace, for it may be the last quiettalk that we shall ever have."
The two friends chatted in intimate converse for a few minutes,recalling once again the days of the past, while their prisonervainly wriggled to undo the bonds that held him. As they turned tothe car Holmes pointed back to the moonlit sea and shook a thoughtfulhead.
"There's an east wind coming, Watson."
"I think not, Holmes. It is very warm."
"Good old Watson! You are the one fixed point in a changing age.There's an east wind coming all the same, such a wind as never blewon England yet. It will be cold and bitter, Watson, and a good manyof us may wither before its blast. But it's God's own wind none theless, and a cleaner, better, stronger land will lie in the sunshinewhen the storm has cleared. Start her up, Watson, for it's time thatwe were on our way. I have a check for five hundred pounds whichshould be cashed early, for the drawer is quite capable of stoppingit if he can."








----------This text is provided to you "as-is" without any warranty. Nowarranties of any kind, expressed or implied, are made to you as tothe text or any medium it may be on, including but not limited towarranties of merchantablity or fitness for a particular purpose.
Pictures for "The Adventure of the Dancing Men", "The Adventure ofthe Priory School", "The Adventure of the Golden Pince-Nez" and "TheAdventure of the Missing Three-Quarter" were taken from a 1911edition of the "The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes" by Smith, Elder & Co.of London.
Pictures for "The Adventure of the Dancing Men" were taken from a1915 edition of "The Return of Sherlock Holmes" by Smith, Elder & Co.of London.
This text was formatted from various free ASCII and HTML variants.See http://sherlock-holm.es for an electronic form of this text andadditional information about it.
This text comes from the collection's version 3.1.






